I prostrate with respect to the sugatas, Who have the dharmakaya, and their offspring, And also to all worthy of veneration. I’ll teach in brief, according to the scriptures, The way to enter the bodhisattva’s vows.
I won’t say anything not said before, Nor have I any skill in poetry. Thus I have not intended this for others— I’ve written it to cultivate my mind.
Meanwhile, this will increase the power of My faith so that I cultivate the virtues. If someone else whose fortune equals mine Should see it, then it may be meaningful.
I’ve gained what is most difficult to get— The leisures and resources to benefit beings. If I do not accomplish good while here, How will I ever come to them again?
Just as between the clouds on pitch-black nights, Lightning reveals the heavens for an instant, Thoughts of the merits of the world arise For a rare moment through the buddhas’ power.
Thus virtues are perpetually weak; The powers of misdeeds are terribly dreadful. Besides the wish for perfect enlightenment, What other virtue triumphs over them?
The lords of sages, who have contemplated For many aeons, see just this will help. Immeasurable multitudes of beings Through this will gain the sublime bliss with ease.
No one should ever forsake bodhichitta Who wants to dispel beings’ unhappiness, Vanquish the hundreds of miseries of existence, And partake in the many hundreds of joys.
If they rouse bodhichitta, in an instant The wretched, fettered in samsara’s prison, Are named the offspring of the sugatas And revered in the worlds of gods and humans.
Just like the greatest kind of alchemy, It takes this unclean body and transforms it Into a priceless jewel, a buddha’s body, So firmly grasp ahold of bodhichitta.
Examined well by the sole leader of beings With his immeasurable mind, it has great value. So you who wish to leave the places of beings, Firmly grasp hold of precious bodhichitta.
All other virtues, like banana trees, Are spent once they have produced a result. The tree of bodhichitta constantly Bears fruit, thus thriving inexhaustibly.
Like those who in great danger, rely on heroes, Why would the careful not rely on that Which liberates them in a single instant, Even if they have done horrendous wrongs?
Like the inferno at an age’s end, It burns up great misdeeds in a single instant. The wise protector Maitreya explained Its countless benefits to Sudhana.
To summarize, it’s understood There are two types of bodhichitta: The mind aspiring for awakening And engagement in awakening.
Just as they know the difference Between the wish to go and going, The wise should understand the contrast Between these two, respectively.
Even in samsara, great results Come from aspiring bodhichitta, Though unlike engaged bodhichitta, The merit is not continuous.
But from the moment, when for the sake Of freeing beings in infinite realms, You truly take up this intent With irreversible resolve,
From that time on, the many powers Of merit flow forth unremitting In torrents equal to the sky Even when you’re asleep or careless.
The Tathagata himself explained This and its reasons for the sake Of beings inclined to the Foundation In the Sutra Requested by Subahu.
If someone who benevolently Intends to merely eliminate Sharp pains in sentient beings’ heads Possesses immeasurable merit,
What need to speak of those who wish To rid all sentient beings of Untold distresses and endow Each one with boundless qualities?
Who has such altruism as this? Does even a father or a mother? Or do the gods or else the rishis? Do even Brahmas harbor this?
If sentient beings themselves have never Had such a wish as this before Even for their own sake in dreams, How could they have it for another?
The wish to benefit beings that others Have never had for their own sake— This special jewel of mind—is born, A wonder without precedent.
The cause of every wanderer’s joy, The cure for beings’ suffering; How could one take the measure of The merit of this precious mind?
If merely intending to benefit Is greater than revering the Buddha, What need to speak of striving for The sake of all beings’ happiness?
They wish to cast off suffering But rush toward suffering itself. They wish for happiness, but deluded, Crush their own pleasure like a foe.
For those deprived of happiness Who suffer many miseries, This satisfies with every pleasure And severs every suffering.
It also will dispel delusion. How could there be such good as this? How could there be a friend like this? How could there be such merit as this?
If to reciprocate a kind deed Is praiseworthy for a short while, What need to speak of bodhisattvas Who do good unsolicited?
People extol as doing something good Those who provide a few with regular meals, Donating scornfully for a short time Plain food that satisfies for half a day.
What need to speak of those who always give To beings of untold number for a long time The sublime happiness of the sugatas, Fulfilling every one of their desires?
Someone who rouses a malicious thought Toward such a patron, offspring of the victors, Will dwell in hell as many aeons as The count of their bad thoughts, the Sage has said.
But the results of someone feeling faith Proliferate in far greater abundance. With bodhisattvas, even grave events Don’t bring misdeeds; good naturally increases.
I prostrate to the bodies of those in whom This jewel, the sublime attitude, is born. Even harming them will lead to happiness. I go for refuge to the wellsprings of joy.
In order to grasp that precious attitude, I make fine offerings to the tathagatas, To the true dharma, the immaculate jewel, And to the oceans of qualities, bodhisattvas.
As many fruits and flowers as there are, Whatever kinds of medicine exist, However many jewels there are in the world, All clean and pleasant waters there may be,
Mountains of jewels and likewise forest groves In solitary and delightful places, Bushes adorned with ornamental flowers, And trees whose branches bow with splendid fruit,
Incense and perfumes as from divine worlds And so forth, wish-fulfilling trees, jewel trees, And crops that grow without need to be plowed, All ornaments that are fit to be offered,
And lakes and pools bedecked with lotuses, Where lovely swans have most delightful calls— Everything that’s unowned extending to The edges of the realms of infinite space—
I imagine taking these and offer them well To the sages, greatest of beings, and their offspring, Sublime and greatly compassionate recipients. Think of me lovingly; accept these from me.
I am bereft of merit, destitute, And have no other wealth that I could offer. May the protectors, who think of others’ weal, Accept these through their power for my sake.
Forevermore I offer all my bodies To the victorious ones and to their offspring. O sublime beings, accept me entirely, And I will be your dedicated servant.
Because you have accepted me completely, Not fearing existence, I will benefit beings. I will transcend my previous misdeeds And never do another wrong again.
Within this sweetly fragrant house for bathing, Where the bright and lustrous floors are paved with crystal, Alluring pillars are aglow with jewels, And glistening pearls are draped in canopies,
I bathe the sugatas and bodhisattvas From precious vases that have been filled full Of water imbued with many fragrances, Accompanied by song and harmonies.
With cloths that are beyond compare and clean, Infused with a fine scent, I dry their bodies. And then I offer them the finest robes, Well dyed and most delightfully perfumed.
I drape Samantabhadra, Lokeshvara, Manjushri, and the other noble beings With fabrics that are delicate and soft And hundreds of the finest ornaments.
Like polishing the purest refined gold, I apply the finest scents, whose fragrances Waft everywhere throughout the billion worlds, To the radiant bodies of all sugatas.
I offer the great beings I venerate, The lords of sages, every fragrant flower— Mandarava, lotus, jasmine, and so forth— And pleasing garlands strung attractively.
I also offer billowing clouds of incense Filled with the sweetest, most enchanting scents. And royal feasts I offer them as well, Replete with an assortment of food and drink.
Further, I make an offering of jeweled lamps Arranged in rows on golden lotuses. I scatter the petals of attractive flowers On a paved floor anointed with perfume.
I offer those who are compassionate Numberless palaces adorning the sky, Beautifully glowing with strings of pearls and jewels And echoing with melodious songs of praise.
I always offer to the lords of sages Beauteous, jeweled parasols with golden staves, Fine shaped, upright, and pleasing to the eye, Their rims festooned with winsome ornaments.
And furthermore, may there extend Clouds of attractive offerings, With lovely tunes and harmonies, That soothe all beings’ sufferings.
May rains of gems and flowers and more Continuously shower down On all the jewels of the true dharma As well as on stupas and likenesses.
As Manjughosha and the rest Make offerings to the victorious ones, I offer to the tathagatas— The protectors—and their offspring.
I extol the oceans of qualities With oceans of melodies of praise. May clouds of hymns in praise of them Arise just so continuously.
I prostrate, bowing as many bodies As there are atoms in all realms, To all the buddhas of the three times, The dharma, and the sublime sangha.
I prostrate to the sacred sites And stupas of the bodhisattva. I also prostrate to the abbots, The masters, and the supreme adepts.
Until I reach enlightenment’s essence, I go for refuge to the buddhas. I go for refuge to the dharma And sangha of bodhisattvas too.
To the perfect buddhas and bodhisattvas Who dwell in every direction— To those endowed with great compassion— I join my palms and supplicate:
In this and in my other lives Throughout beginningless samsara, Deluded, I have done misdeeds. I’ve instigated them, and also—
Compelled by ignorant confusion— I have rejoiced in them. I see They were mistakes, and I confess To the protectors from my depths.
I have, because of the afflictions, Caused harm with body, speech, and mind To the three jewels and to my parents And to the gurus, among others.
I, who am wicked and am stained By numerous failings, have committed Misdeeds that are most terrible. Before the guides, I confess them all.
I am going to perish quickly, Before I’m cleansed of my misdeeds. How can I be rescued from them? I beg you, please deliver me.
The Lord of Death, untrustworthy, Won’t tarry for what’s done or undone. So no one, whether or not they’re ill, Should place their trust in fleeting life.
I must leave all behind and go, But I have not yet recognized that. For the sake of those I like or dislike, I have done various misdeeds.
Those I don’t like will cease to be, And those I like will cease to be. I myself will cease to be, And everyone will cease to be.
All of the things that I have used Will become objects of memory, As if experienced in a dream. I’ll never see what’s past again.
Even during this life, many of those I like and dislike have passed away. And yet the terrible misdeeds I’ve done for their sake remain before me.
Because I have not recognized That I, as well, am ephemeral, I have committed many wrongs Out of delusion, greed, and hatred.
Not pausing even a day or night, This life’s continuously depleted, And there is no extending it. So why would one like me not die?
While I am lying in my bed Surrounded by all my relatives, I will experience alone The feeling of my life being cut.
When seized by Yama’s messengers, What good are friends? What good are kin? Merit alone will guard me then, But I, alas, haven’t practiced that.
Protectors, I have carelessly Committed numerous misdeeds For the sake of this ephemeral life, Oblivious there is such a danger.
If people who are being led To have their limbs chopped off today Look different than they did before With their parched mouths and bloodshot eyes,
What need to say how wretched I’ll be When Yama’s henchmen have me seized, Their physiognomies dire and dread, And I am gripped by terrible pain?
“Who will protect me truly from This horrifying danger,” I’ll cry, Eyes bulging with terror, as I search In the four directions for a refuge.
But seeing no protection in The four directions, I’ll then despair. If there’s no refuge in that place, What will I do at such a time?
Thus from today, I’ll go for refuge To the victors, guardians of beings, Who strive to protect all wanderers, Those with great power who dispel all fear.
Likewise I truly go for refuge To the dharma they have realized, which Dispels the terrors of samsara, And to the sangha of bodhisattvas.
Petrified with dread, I give Myself over to Samantabhadra. I also make an offering To Manjughosha of my body.
I cry a miserable wail To guardian Avalokiteshvara, Whose acts of mercy are unmistaken. I beg, protect me who have done wrong.
To noble Akashagarbha and To Kshitigarbha, to every one Of the protectors with great compassion, I cry from my heart in search of refuge.
I go for refuge to Vajrapani, Upon the sight of whom, from fear, Malevolent beings like the henchmen Of Yama flee in the four directions.
I have in the past transgressed your word, But now that I’ve seen the great peril, I go to you for refuge and plead: Swiftly eliminate this fear.
If one must do as doctors say From fear of ordinary illness, What need to speak of being infected Continually by the sickness of The hundred wrongs of lust and such?
If even one of these can ruin All people who live in Jambudvipa And no other medicine to cure it Can be obtained in any direction,
To think that I might not do as Directed by the omniscient healer Who removes every pain would be Blameworthy and completely deluded.
If I must be quite careful of A minor, ordinary chasm, What need to mention the abyss Where I’d fall a thousand leagues for long?
It is not right to sit content And say “I will not die today.” It is inevitable the time Will come when I will cease to be.
Who will grant me freedom from fear? And how will I escape from this? I certainly will no longer be. How can my mind remain at ease?
My past experiences are gone, And what do I have left of them? But out of my fixation on them, I’ve gone against the gurus’ words.
If I must leave this life behind Along with family and friends And go off somewhere else alone, What good all those I like or dislike?
It would be right to only think In just this way all day and night: “Nonvirtue leads to suffering. How can I be freed from it?”
Whatever misdeeds I have done From being ignorant and deluded, Whether they’re naturally unwholesome Or disobedient misdeeds,
Within the presence of the protectors, From fear of suffering, I join My palms and prostrate repeatedly, Confessing every one of them.
I supplicate you, guides! Accept That my misdeeds have been mistaken. They were not good, and for that reason, I’ll never do such acts again.
Delighted, I rejoice in virtue— Respite from the pains Of lower realms—and in those who suffer Dwelling in happiness.
I rejoice in beings’ emancipation From the suffering of samsara, In the protectors’ buddhahood, And the bodhisattvas’ levels.
I rejoice gladly in the ocean Of bodhichitta that brings All sentient beings to happiness And gives them benefit.
With my palms joined, I implore the buddhas In all directions: Light The lamp of dharma in the gloom Of ignorant beings’ woes!
Joining my palms, I beseech the victors Who wish to pass to nirvana, Don’t leave these wanderers in blindness— Stay for countless aeons!
May the virtue I have amassed By doing all of this Eliminate all the suffering Of every sentient being.
As long as sentient beings are ill, Until their ailments are cured, May I be their medicine, their doctor, And their nurse as well.
May showers of food and drink relieve The torments of hunger and thirst. In intermediate aeons of famine, May I become food and drink.
May I be an inexhaustible treasure For poor and deprived beings And stay nearby them as the various Things they need and want.
To benefit all sentient beings, I give without hesitation My body, my belongings, and All virtues of the three times.
Nirvana’s relinquishing everything. My wish is to gain nirvana. At some point, all must be relinquished— It’s best to give it to beings.
As I have given living beings This body for their pleasure, May they always do with it as they like— Let them kill, revile, or beat it.
They may make my body a cause for sport, Or jest or snickering, But I have given them my body. Why bother holding it dear?
So let them do whatever acts Will not bring them any harm. May thinking of me never be Meaningless for any.
When someone thinks of me and has A thought of anger or faith, May that be the cause of what fulfills Their every benefit.
May anyone who slanders me, Any others who cause harm, And all who criticize me have The fortune to awaken.
May I be a guardian of the defenseless, A leader of travelers, A boat or ship or even a bridge For those who wish to cross,
The land for those who seek the land, A bed for those without. For all those beings who want a servant, May I become their slave.
May I be a wish-fulfilling jewel, Fine vase, accomplished mantra, Great medicine, a heaven tree, And bountiful cow for beings.
Like earth and the other elements, Like space, may I always be The ground, supporting in many ways The lives of sentient beings.
Likewise in all ways for all beings Out to the edges of space, May I be, till all pass to nirvana, What gives them sustenance.
Just as the sugatas of the past Aroused the mind of bodhichitta, Just as they followed step-by-step The training of the bodhisattvas,
So, too, shall I, to benefit wanderers, Arouse the mind of bodhichitta. So, too, shall I follow step-by-step The bodhisattvas’ training.
Once the intelligent have thus Embraced sincerely bodhichitta, They take delight in their resolve So that it may continue to grow.
My life has become fruitful now. I’ve gained this human existence well. Now I’ve been born in the buddhas’ family And have become the buddhas’ child.
From now on I shall always act In ways that befit my family So as to bring no blemish on This stainless, venerable family.
Like a blind man who has discovered A jewel amidst a heap of garbage, Somehow, by a coincidence, Bodhichitta has been born in me.
This is the great elixir that Vanquishes the Lord of Death. It is the inexhaustible treasure Dispelling the poverty of beings.
This is the supreme medicine That cures the maladies of the world, A resting tree for beings exhausted From wandering the paths of existence.
This is the universal bridge That frees all beings from lower realms, The rising moon of mind that soothes The torments of sentient beings’ afflictions.
It’s the great sun that brings an end To the darkness of beings’ ignorance. It is the butter that emerges From churning the milk of the true dharma.
For travelers roaming on the paths of existence, Desiring to partake of happiness, This sublime blissfulness is close at hand To satisfy the supreme guests, sentient beings.
Today, in the presence of all the protectors, I invite all sentient beings as my guests To buddhahood, and till then happiness. Gods, demigods, and everyone rejoice!
The victors’ offspring who have thus Grasped bodhichitta steadfastly Must strive without any lassitude To never violate the precepts.
When something has been started rashly Or is not properly thought out, Even if promised, it is best To examine whether to act or not.
But why should I put off that which The buddhas and their offspring have Investigated with great prajna And I myself have also examined?
If now that I have made a promise, I don’t fulfill it with my actions, I will have hoodwinked all those beings, And what will be my destiny?
A person who thinks in their mind To give some trifling, little thing But does not give it will become A hungry ghost, it has been said.
Having invited them from my heart As guests to sublime happiness, If I deceive all wanderers, Will I go to the higher realms?
People who give up bodhichitta Still being liberated is An inconceivable way of karma That only the omniscient know.
This downfall, for a bodhisattva, Is the most serious of all. If it occurs, their benefit To all sentient beings is diminished.
Anyone else who thwarts their merit Even a moment will be born Endlessly in the lower realms Since they’ve decreased all beings’ welfare.
If one who spoils the happiness Of even a single being is ruined, Why mention ruining the well-being Of infinite beings throughout space?
If swinging back and forth between Strong downfalls and strong bodhichitta, You mix them in samsaric cycles, It will take long to reach the levels.
Therefore I will, with dedication, Accomplish what I promised to do. If from now on, I make no effort, I’ll go from lower to lower realm.
Though countless buddhas have appeared And benefited all sentient beings, Due to my wrongs, I have not been A beneficiary of their succor.
If I still act in such a way, Over and over again I will Experience in the lower realms Being sick, bound, hacked, and stabbed, and such.
It’s rare a tathagata appears, Rare to gain faith, a human body, And the ability to cultivate virtue. When will I ever have these again?
Although on days such as today, I may be healthy, fed, and safe, Life will deceive me in an instant— This body’s a momentary loan.
Behaving like this, I will not get A human body ever again. If I don’t gain a human body, There’s only wrong and never good.
If I do not act virtuously Despite my fortune to do good, What will I do when stupefied By the suffering of the lower realms?
If I do not perform any virtues And accumulate misdeeds, I’ll never, for billions of aeons, Even hear the words “the higher realms.”
Therefore the Bhagavan taught gaining A human body is as hard As for a turtle to stick its neck Through a yoke tossed on the vast seas.
If due to a wrong done in an instant, One will stay aeons in the Incessant, What need to say that due to misdeeds I’ve done in beginningless samsara, I will not go to the higher realms?
After I have experienced That much, I won’t be freed from there, For while I am experiencing it, I will produce still more misdeeds.
Now that I’ve gained such leisure as this, If I don’t cultivate the virtues, There’s no deception other than this, Nor any greater idiocy.
And if, once I have realized this, I am, deluded, still despondent, When the time comes for me to die, I’ll feel tremendous grief well up.
When the intolerable flames Of hell have burned my body long, There is no doubt that blazing fires Of dreadful rue will wrack my mind.
Somehow, by luck, I’ve gained a place Of benefit so hard to get. If I, while I am cognizant, Am led back to those hells again,
It is as if I’ve been bewitched By spells and have no will in this. I don’t know what’s deluded me— What do I have inside of me?
Aversion, craving, and so forth— My enemies—have no limbs and such. They are not brave or wise, and yet They’ve somehow made me like a slave.
As long as they dwell in my mind, They’ll cause me harm at their own pleasure. It’s wrong to bear that without anger— Being patient would be blameworthy.
If all the gods and demigods Arose against me as my foes, They could not take or force me to The fires of the Incessant Hell.
This powerful enemy, afflictions, Will cast me in an instant there Where even Mount Meru would be turned To ash on contact, nothing left.
The adversaries, my afflictions, Last long, without beginning or end. No other enemy is able To endure so long a time as them.
Everyone, when attended kindly, Is helpful and will try to please, But when afflictions are appeased, They inflict more suffering in return.
If thus my long and constant enemies— The only cause of the proliferation Of manifold harms—remain within my heart, Can I be safe and happy in samsara?
If the keepers of the prison of samsara, Such as the murderous butchers in the hells, Live in the webs of greed within my mind, How can there be any happiness for me?
Therefore, until I see that I have truly slain This enemy, I will not slacken in my efforts. Those who are filled with pride, once angered, cannot sleep Until those who have caused a slight offense are killed.
Once the afflicted, who suffer from a mortal nature, Enter the fray of battle with a strong wish to triumph, They scorn the pain of being struck by spears and arrows And won’t retreat until they have attained their goal.
For me, who strives to vanquish my true, natural foes That always are the cause of every suffering, What need is there to say—I won’t now be dismayed Or daunted by the hundred causes of misery.
If someone wounded pointlessly by enemies Will flaunt their scars as decorations on their body, How then is suffering a cause of injury For me who truly strives to accomplish a great purpose?
If fishermen, outcasts, farmers, and so forth With only thought of their own livelihood, Forbear the harms of heat and cold and such, Why don’t I bear with those for beings’ weal?
When I swore I would free all beings To the ends of space in all directions From the afflictions, I myself Was not yet free of the afflictions.
How is it speaking without knowing My limitations was not insane? Therefore I’ll never be turned back In subjugating the afflictions.
I’ll cling to this tenaciously And enter battle bearing a grudge Against afflictions other than The type that conquers the afflictions.
It would be better to be slain By being burnt or decapitated. In no way shall I ever bow Before my enemy, the afflictions.
Though ordinary enemies, when banished, Will stay in other lands, which they adopt To build their power until their return, The enemy affliction is not so.
Wretched afflictions, cast out by the eye of prajna! When they are driven from my mind, where can they go? Where can they stay so that they can return to harm me? It’s just that I, weak-minded, have not persevered.
Afflictions do not dwell in objects, in the senses, or between. Nor are they somewhere else. Where do they dwell that harm all beings? They’re like illusions. Rid your heart of fear, and apply diligence For the sake of prajna. Why let them torment you pointlessly in hell?
I’ve contemplated thus and now will strive To undertake the precepts as described. How can a patient who needs medicine Be cured if they ignore the doctor’s advice?
All those who wish to keep the precepts Should concentrate and guard their minds. If you do not protect your mind, You won’t be able to keep the precepts.
An untamed elephant amok Does not create as much harm here As letting the elephant of mind Run loose will cause in the Incessant.
The elephant of mind tied tight With ropes of mindfulness all round, All dangers will amount to naught; All virtues will come into your hands.
All tigers, lions, elephants, Bears, snakes, and enemies, The keepers of the beings in hell, The dakinis and rakshasas—
By binding just this mind alone, All of these will be bound. By taming just the mind alone, All of these will be tamed.
For he who spoke the truth has taught That everything we fear And sufferings beyond all measure Originate from mind.
Who is it that specifically made The weapons of the hells? Who made the ground of burning iron? Whence come the lovers in hell?
The Sage has said that all of these Arise from wicked thoughts. Therefore there is in the three worlds No danger other than mind.
If ridding the world of poverty Made generosity transcendent, There are still paupers, so how could The past protectors have transcended?
The wish to give all your belongings And the results to everyone Is taught to be transcendent giving, And therefore that is mind itself.
And where could fish, et cetera, Be sent where they would not be killed? Discipline’s taught to be transcendent From gaining the intent to abstain.
How could one kill belligerent beings Who are as infinite as space? Vanquishing this one angry mind Is like defeating all those foes.
How could there be sufficient leather To cover the earth entirely? With just the leather for my soles, It is as if the whole earth’s covered.
Likewise, although I am unable To keep external things at bay, I’ll keep this mind of mine in check— What need to ward off anything else?
Even with body and speech, results Of feeble conduct are not like The fruit of rousing one clear thought— Rebirth in such as Brahma’s Realm.
No matter how long they are practiced, All liturgies and austerities Are futile, said the knower of suchness, If something else distracts the mind.
Those who don’t know this secret of mind— The sublime, paramount of dharmas— Want to gain joy and end suffering But wander to no avail or end.
Thus I will grasp and protect well This mind of mine. This discipline Of guarding mind aside, why bother With multifarious disciplines?
Like those who in a boisterous crowd Concentrate and take care of their wounds, Those in the crowds of evil people Should always guard the wound of mind.
If you are careful of a wound From fear of its slight, minor pain, Why not protect the wound of mind From fear of crushing mountains in hell?
Living by conduct such as this, A steadfast monk who keeps his vows, Whether in crowds of evil people Or among women, will not fall.
It would be better to lose my things, Life, limbs, respect, or livelihood; Better that other virtues lapse Than ever my intent diminish.
I join my palms in prayer and urge All those who wish to guard their minds: With all your efforts, please protect Your mindfulness and your awareness.
People who are beset by illness Have no strength to do anything, And minds beset by ignorance Have no strength to do anything.
Even if those who lack awareness Should listen, ponder, or meditate, It won’t stay in their memory, Like water in a leaky jar.
Due to the fault of nonawareness, Many of those with learning, faith, And dedicated perseverance Will be polluted by the downfalls.
The robbers that are a lack of awareness, Following weakened mindfulness, Will seize the merits you have gathered While you go to the lower realms.
This gang of bandits, the afflictions, Are seeking opportunities. Given a chance, they’ll plunder virtue And slaughter life in higher realms.
Thus never let your mindfulness Stray from the gateway to your mind, And if it goes, recall the pains Of the lower realms to bring it back.
From keeping company with a master, Instruction from the abbot, and fear, Those who have fortune and respect Develop mindfulness easily.
“The buddhas and the bodhisattvas See everywhere without obstruction. Therefore I always am indeed Within the presence of them all.”
Thinking thus conscientiously, Respectfully, and fearfully, The recollection of the buddha Will then arise repeatedly.
When mindfulness is stationed there To guard the gateway to the mind, Awareness will then also come And return if it has departed.
In every moment, first of all, I must know if my mind is tainted, And at that time, I must be able To hold still like a block of wood.
I’ll never allow myself to look Around in purposeless distraction. With my mind focused, I’ll instead Look always with my gaze cast down.
But sometimes I might glance about To rest my eyes when they’re fatigued. If someone should come into sight, I’ll look at them and say, “Hello!”
To know the perils on the road, I’ll look in the four directions often. Pausing, I first will turn around Before I look behind myself.
Having thus looked ahead and behind, I’ll then proceed or else return. In every situation, I will Act knowing the necessity.
Beginning endeavors with the thought “With body, I will stay like this,” I’ll then occasionally examine “How is my body situated?”
With all my efforts, I must check That the crazed elephant of mind Has not slipped loose from being tied To the great post of thoughts of dharma.
Exerting myself in samadhi, I shall examine my own mind By thinking “What is my mind doing?” To not lose it for even a moment.
If due to danger, feasts, and such, You cannot, do what’s easiest. It’s taught that in a time of giving, You may ignore some discipline.
Once you’ve considered and begun A task, don’t think of anything else. Focusing your attention there, You should accomplish that one first.
If you do this, all is done well. Otherwise neither will get done. In this way, you will not increase The near affliction nonawareness.
If you engage in idle chat Or in amazing spectacles Of various and different kinds, Give up your eagerness for them.
If you should dig the ground, cut plants, Or draw in dirt without a purpose, Recall the words of the Sugata And at that moment, stop from fear.
Whenever you have a wish to move Or else you feel a wish to speak, Examine your mind first, and then Be firm in acting properly.
At times when my mind feels the lust Of greed or else the urge of anger, I must not act and must not speak— I’ll hold still like a block of wood.
When I’m excited or else gleeful, When I feel pride or arrogance, When I’ve the thought to dig up faults, Revive disputes, or be deceitful,
At times when I’m intent on boasting Or being disparaging of others, When I’m abusive or contentious, I’ll hold still like a block of wood.
When I want gains, respect, and fame Or long for a cortege of servants, When my mind wants that I be served, I’ll hold still like a block of wood.
A wish to give up on others’ weal And seek out my own benefit, A yen for talk—if these arise, I’ll hold still like a block of wood.
And when impatience, laziness, Fear, impudence, or garrulousness Or bias toward my own arises, I will hold still like a block of wood.
Thus noticing when their mind becomes Afflicted or occupied pointlessly, The heroes use the antidotes To keep it firmly in control.
I will be resolute, full of faith, Steady, respectful, courteous, Conscientious, fearful, calm, And dedicated to pleasing others.
I won’t despair at the wishes of The childish who don’t get along. I will be loving, thinking that Such thoughts are due to the afflictions.
Directed by myself and beings Toward things that are irreproachable, I’ll always keep my mind held fast, Without a me, like an emanation.
Over and over again, I’ll think How after so long I have found The greatest leisure, and keep my mind Unshakable as Mount Sumeru.
If, mind, you will not be distressed When vultures lusting for its meat Together tear the body apart, Why do you cherish it so now?
O mind, why is it that you grasp This body as yours and guard it so? If you and it are separate, Then what good does it do for you?
Deluded mind, why don’t you cling To a clean wooden figurine? How is it sensible to protect This festering machine of filth?
First with your intellect, dissect And separate the layers of skin. Dissever with the blade of prajna The flesh apart from the cage of bones.
Then chop apart the bones as well. Look in as far as to the marrow And analyze it for yourself. What essence does it have?
If even searching with such effort, You don’t see in it any essence, Why is it that you still protect This body in such an attached manner?
Its filth is not fit for you to eat, Nor is its blood fit to drink either. Its entrails are unfit to suck. What does the body do for you?
Instead, it’s logical it be kept As food for jackals and for vultures. The bodies of all human beings Are merely something to be used.
Even though you protect it so, When the merciless Lord of Death Takes it to give to birds and dogs, Will there be anything you can do?
If you do not give clothes and such To servants who can’t be employed, Why tire yourself to keep this body That will, though fed, go somewhere else?
Now that you’ve given it a wage, Put it to work for your own sake. Do not give everything to it If there’s not any benefit.
Think of this body as a boat, A mere support for coming and going. Make it so it fulfills your wish To benefit all sentient beings.
In such a way, be self-controlled, And always have a smiling face. Abandon glowering brows and scowls. Be friendly to beings and straightforward.
Do not shove chairs and such about Impetuously and noisily. Don’t violently open doors. Always delight in being quiet.
Cranes, cats, and burglars move around In silence, unobtrusively, To achieve the ends that they desire. The sages always behave likewise.
Ever a student of everyone, Respectfully accept advice That’s helpful or unsolicited From those skilled in advising others.
To all those who have spoken well, Say, “You have spoken virtuously.” When you see someone perform merit, Make them feel glad by praising them.
Speak of good qualities discreetly; Repeat them when they’re spoken of. When someone speaks of your good traits, Understand they know qualities.
All efforts are for happiness’s sake, But even bought with wealth, it’s rare. So I’ll enjoy the pleasure of Delight in the good that others do.
For me, there will be no loss here, And in the next, great happiness. Wrongdoing brings gloom and suffering, And in the next, great miseries.
When talking, you should speak sincerely, Coherently, clearly, pleasantly, Without attachment or aversion, Gently, and in moderation.
When you look at a sentient being, Think that it’s only due to them That you’ll awaken to buddhahood, And look sincerely, lovingly.
Inspired continuously by yearning Or by the antidotes, great virtues Are found in the fields of qualities, Of benefit, and of suffering.
Both skillfully and cheerfully, I’ll always do my tasks myself. I won’t, in any of my actions, Be dependent on anyone.
Transcendent giving and so forth Progress, each greater than the last. Don’t drop the greater for the lesser. Think mainly of others’ benefit.
Realizing this, continually Make efforts for the sake of others. The merciful, far-seeing one Allows for them what was forbidden.
Sharing with those who’ve fallen low, The unprotected, and ascetics, Eat moderately. Give away All except the three dharma robes.
For minor ends, don’t harm this body That is for practicing true dharma. By doing so, you’ll soon fulfill The wishes of all sentient beings.
Unless your compassionate intent Is pure, don’t sacrifice your body, But give it as a cause to achieve Great aims in this and in the next.
Dharma should not be taught to those Who lack respect, who though not sick, Wear turbans, or hold parasols Or staves or weapons, or veil their heads.
Don’t teach the lesser the vast and deep, Or women unless a man is present. Approach with equal reverence Foundational and higher dharmas.
Don’t introduce a lesser dharma To those who are vessels for the vast. Also, do not disregard conduct Or lead astray with sutras and mantras.
Cover it up when you discard A tooth stick or else when you spit. It is disgraceful to urinate And such on usable land and water.
When eating, do not cram your food, Eat noisily, or open mouthed. Do not sit with your legs stretched out; Don’t rub both arms at the same time.
Don’t be alone with another’s spouse On rides, beds, seats, or other places. Observe, inquire, and then give up All that makes people lose their faith.
Don’t point at anything with one finger. Instead, use your entire right hand To gesture in a respectful way, Showing the path in such a manner.
To give a signal, do not wave Your entire arm; just move it slightly And make a noise such as by snapping. Otherwise it is unrestrained.
Like the Protector at nirvana, Lie down in your preferred direction, And from the outset, with awareness, Resolve that you will get up promptly.
The bodhisattva’s practices Are taught to be innumerable. Among them, surely first embrace The ways of purifying the mind.
Three times each day, three times each night, Recite the Sutra in Three Sections. Because of the buddhas and bodhichitta, This pacifies remaining downfalls.
Whatever you do at any time Whether for your or others’ sakes, Make efforts to train in the precepts That have been taught for that situation.
There is not anything at all The victors’ offspring should not learn, And for the wise who live like this, There’s nothing that will not be merit.
Do nothing but what benefits Beings directly or indirectly. Dedicate solely for beings’ sakes Everything to enlightenment.
Even at cost of your own life, Never forsake the spiritual friend Who’s learned in the Mahayana And great in the bodhisattva vow.
Train in the ways to serve the guru From the life story of Shri Sambhava. This and the Buddha’s other teachings Are to be learned by reading sutras.
The precepts are described in them, So therefore you should read the sutras. As a beginning, you should read The Sutra of Akashagarbha.
Because it teaches in detail What must be practiced constantly, Over and over again, you should Read the Compendium of Trainings.
Or else, for the time being, read The shorter Compendium of Sutras, And also you should try to study The two by noble Nagarjuna.
What those do not prohibit is The merit you should act upon. To guard the minds of worldly people, Noting the precepts, act correctly.
In brief, the characteristic of Maintaining awareness is just this: Examine over and over again The status of your mind and body.
With body, I will practice these— What does just mouthing words achieve? Does merely reading medical books Bring benefit to patients?
One moment’s anger shatters all Good acts accumulated In a thousand aeons, such as giving Or offering to the buddhas.
There is no misdeed like hatred; No austerity like patience. So cultivate assiduously Patience in various ways.
When pangs of hatred clutch the mind, It does not feel any peace. No joy, no comfort, and no sleep, No constancy can be had.
Even though he has shown them favor With riches and respect, Dependents will confront and kill A master filled with hate.
He will distress his friends and kin. Those gathered with gifts won’t serve. In brief, there is not anything That makes the angry happy.
The enemy anger will create Sufferings such as these. Those bent on overcoming anger Are happy here and elsewhere.
When what I do not want is done, Or my desires are blocked, Displeasure will then fuel my hatred, Which will grow to destroy me.
Thus I’ll destroy the sustenance Of this, my nemesis. Other than causing harm to me, This enemy has no function.
Whatever happens, I will not Upset my cheerfulness. Displeasure won’t fulfill my wishes But strip away my virtues.
If something can be fixed, what need Is there to be displeased? If something can’t be fixed, what good Is it to be displeased?
We don’t want pain, humiliation, Insults, or disrepute Either for us or for our friends. It’s the opposite for our foes.
The causes of happiness are rare; The causes of pain are frequent. Without pain, there’s no wish for freedom, So, mind, you must be steadfast.
The Durga cults and Karnatans Pointlessly bear the sensations Of burns and wounds, so why am I A coward for freedom’s sake?
There’s nothing at all that is not easy If you are used to it. By getting used to minor pains, You’ll bear great harms as well.
Don’t I see this with pointless pains Of serpents and mosquitoes, Of feelings of hunger, thirst, and such, And rashes and so forth?
Thus I won’t be thin-skinned about Heat, cold, and wind and rain, Or illness, bondage, beatings, and such— Being so makes them worse.
Some, seeing their own blood, become Exceptionally courageous, And some, on seeing another’s blood, Will faint and fall unconscious.
This is from steadfastness of mind Or else from cowardice. Thus disregard the injuries— Do not let pains affect you.
Though pain occurs, the wise do not Disturb their joy of mind. When waging war against afflictions, Harm’s plentiful in battle.
Triumphant heroes are they who Ignore all pain and quash Hatred and such—the enemy. Everyone else kills corpses.
Plus, suffering has benefits: Weariness dispels arrogance; Compassion arises for the samsaric; Shunning misdeeds, you delight in virtue.
We don’t get angry at bile and such, Great sources of suffering, So why be angry at the sentient? Conditions provoke them too.
Just as such illnesses occur Involuntarily, Afflictions are compelled to arise Involuntarily.
Though people don’t think, “I’ll get angry,” The commonplace angers them. Though they don’t think, “I shall arouse it,” Their fury still arises.
All the offenses that there are, All manifold misdeeds, Occur because of their conditions— They have no self-control.
And the assembly of conditions Has no thought “I’ll produce,” Nor does what it produces have The thought “I’ll be produced.”
The primal substance that they claim And self that they imagine Do not think, “I will come to be,” And arise intentionally.
Without arising, they don’t exist— What then would want to arise? Always distracted by an object, It also would never cease.
If permanent, the self, like space, Would clearly have no action. When it encounters other conditions, What acts on the unchanging?
If during the action, it’s like before, What does the action do to it? If you say, “This is what acts on it,” What is it that’s related?
In this way, everything’s dependent And thus has no control. When you know that, you won’t get angry At any illusory thing.
“Who averts what? Even averting Would be illogical.” It’s logical to say suffering Will cease, dependent on that.
Thus when you see a friend or foe Acting improperly, Think happily that this occurred Because of such conditions.
If things were accomplished by free will, No living being at all Would ever have any suffering, For no one wants to suffer.
They injure themselves by being careless Of thorns, et cetera. From lust, they starve themselves and such For sake of sex and the like.
Some hang themselves or jump from cliffs, Take poison or eat poorly, Or behave unmeritoriously, Causing themselves harm.
When overcome by the afflictions, They’ll kill their own dear selves. At such a time, how would they not Cause harm to others’ bodies?
Though rarely do we feel compassion For those who kill themselves And so forth when afflictions arise, What good is getting angry?
If causing harm to others is The nature of the childish, Anger at them is as senseless as Resenting fire for heat.
But if the fault is adventitious And beings’ natures are gentle, Anger at them would not be right, Like begrudging the sky for wafting smoke.
If I, ignoring the main thing— The stick—get angry at its wielder, Who is impelled by ire, it’s right To get incensed at hatred.
I, in the past, have caused such harms To other sentient beings, So it is right these ills occur To me who have hurt beings.
Their weapons and my body both Are causes of suffering. They wield the weapons, I the body. With whom should I get angry?
Blinded by craving, I have grasped This human body-like blister That, prone to pain, can’t bear being touched. Whom to get mad at when it’s hurt?
The childish don’t want suffering, But thirst for suffering’s causes. Can I resent another being When harmed by my own wrongs?
If like the guardians of hell And like the sword-leaf forests, This is produced by my own actions, At whom should I get angry?
If those who, goaded by my karma, Appear and do me harm Should go to hell because of that, Have I not brought them ruin?
Because of them, I’ll purify My many misdeeds through patience. Because of me, they’ll go to hell’s Long-lasting agonies.
If I am causing harm to them While they are helping me, Why, O cruel mind, do you get angry Mistakenly at them?
If I’ve the quality of intention, I will not go to hell, And what can happen to them now If I protect myself?
But if I harm them in return, They will not be protected While my own conduct is debased; Austerity destroyed.
Because the mind’s not physical, No one can wound it at all. Because of fixation on the body, The body is harmed by pain.
Contemptuousness, abusive speech, And words that are unpleasant Inflict no harm upon the body. Mind, why do they incense you?
Displeasure others show for me Will not devour me In this or in another life. So why do I dislike it?
Though I do not want that because It blocks material gain, I’ll leave my things behind me here, While wrongs will long remain.
It’s better I die now than live Long with wrong livelihood. Even were I to live for long, The pain of death’s the same.
Someone feels bliss a hundred years In a dream and then wakes up. Another experiences bliss A moment and then wakes.
For either of the two who wake, That bliss will never return. A long life and a short life both Are finished when we die.
Though we acquire many things And enjoy them a long time, We will go as if robbed by bandits— Naked and empty-handed.
If I live off my gains to abate My wrongs and practice virtue, Won’t anger for the sake of goods Waste virtue and be a wrong?
And if the purpose of my living Itself should be debased, What good’s this life when all I do Is to commit misdeeds?
Those who disparage you harm beings So you get angry, you say. Why don’t you also get upset When others are disparaged?
If losing faith depends on others So you forgive the faithless, Afflictions depend on conditions, So why not forgive your critics?
It’s not right to get angry at those Who insult or destroy Statues, stupas, and the true dharma— The buddhas and such aren’t harmed.
As taught above, see those who harm Your master, kin, and friends As doing so from circumstances And thus stave off your anger.
If both the sentient and nonsentient Cause harm to living beings, Why single out and resent the sentient? Forbear their harms instead.
Some, being ignorant, do wrong. Some, being ignorant, get angry. What would make either innocent? Which of the two is guilty?
Why in the past did they do acts That would make others harm them? Since everything depends on karma, Why hold a grudge for the other?
Realizing this, no matter what, I will endeavor at merits So everyone will come to have Mutually loving thoughts.
When fire that has burned one house Spreads to another home, You gather up and throw away The straw and such that fuel it.
Likewise throw away instantly Whatever you’re attached to That fuels the fires of hatred, fearing It will consume your merit.
What’s wrong if someone condemned to death, Their hand cut off, is freed? What’s wrong with human suffering Removing you from the hells?
If I cannot bear this amount Of suffering in the present, Why then do I not stop my anger, Cause of hell’s agonies?
For sake of desire, a thousand times I have experienced Being burned and such in hell but done No good for myself or others.
But this is not that great a harm, And a great aim will be accomplished. It’s right to only be delighted At pains that dispel harm to beings.
If others are pleased when they praise someone As having qualities, Why then, O mind, do you not as well Praise them and take delight?
Your pleasure from rejoicing is A blameless source of delight Allowed by those with qualities— The best way to gather others.
“But others will be happy too.” If you don’t want this joy, You’ve stopped paying wages and will thus Destroy the seen and unseen.
When yours are the qualities described, You want that others be pleased. When others’ qualities are described, You don’t want to be pleased yourself.
If you roused bodhichitta because You want all beings to be happy, When beings find themselves happiness, Why does that make you angry?
If you want for beings the buddhahood Adored in the three worlds, Why does it gall you so to see Them have some paltry honor?
If a relative whom you support— Someone to whom you give— Should gain a livelihood, would you Be angry instead of pleased?
If you don’t want even that for beings, How can you wish them enlightenment? If you are irked by others’ wealth, How can you have bodhichitta?
If they get something or it remains Inside the patron’s house, In either case, it is not yours. Given or not, why care?
Why do you throw away your merits, Your faith, and qualities? Tell why you’re not angry at the one Who doesn’t hold on to their gains.
Do you not only feel no sorrow For the wrongs you’ve done yourself But also want to vie against Those who have performed merit?
Even when enemies are displeased, What’s there for you to enjoy? The wishes in your mind alone Won’t cause them any harm.
How would it please you to accomplish The pain you wish for them? You say you would be satisfied— What greater ruin than that?
Unbearably sharp, the hook cast by The fishermen, afflictions. Caught on it, surely I’ll be cooked In cauldrons by hell’s keepers.
Praise, fame, and honor will not beget Merit or a long life. They will not bring me strength, good health, Or physical well-being.
If I know what is good for me, What’s good for me in those? If all you want is mental pleasure, Use drink and dice and such.
For sake of fame, some squander wealth Or even get themselves killed. What use are words? When you are dead, Who will they make happy?
When their sand castles are destroyed, Children wail in distress. Likewise when I lose praise and fame, My mind is like a child’s.
Words have no mind; for them to wish To praise me is impossible. Though hearing that another likes me May be a cause of pleasure,
What good does someone else’s fondness For me or another do me? That like and pleasure is their own; I won’t get even a bit.
If their being happy makes me pleased, I should be so for all. Why aren’t I pleased when they’re made happy By their love for another?
Therefore my pleasure that arises When I am being praised Is irrational and nothing more Than just a child’s behavior.
Praise and so forth bring distraction, Destroy world weariness, Cause envy of those with qualities, And ruin prosperity.
So haven’t those who lurk nearby To wreck my acclaim and such Come to protect me against falling Into the lower realms?
What need have I, who seek liberation, Of the fetters, gain and respect? And why should I get angry at those Who release me when I’m bound?
When I want to rush into suffering, How is it I get angry At those who, as if blessed by the Buddha, Don’t let me, blocking the way?
It makes no sense to get angry at those Who I think thwart my merit. If there’s no austerity like patience, Should I not dwell in that?
If I cannot be patient with them Because of my own faults, Then all I’ve done is block the cause Of merit that was at hand.
If the cause of something is that which If absent, it won’t be, And with which, it will come to be, How is that called an obstruction?
A beggar appearing at the right time Does not prevent your giving. It is not right to say your abbot Stopped you from going forth.
Though there are beggars in this world, Those who cause harm are rare, For if you do no harm to others, No one will harm you back.
Therefore just like a trove appearing Painlessly in a home, I will delight in enemies, My friends in enlightened conduct.
Since they and I created it, It’s right to give the fruits Of patience to my enemies first, For they’re the cause of patience.
If enemies deserve no honor Since they’ve no thought to make you patient, Why would you honor the true dharma, The cause of accomplishment?
Though you won’t honor your enemies Because they want to harm you, If they, like doctors, wished to help, How could they make you patient?
Thus since malevolent intent Is what produces patience, Just they are the cause of patience and worthy Of veneration, like true dharma.
These are the fields of sentient beings And victors, said the Sage. Many who have respected them Have gone beyond to perfection.
A buddha’s qualities are gained From beings and buddhas alike. How is it right to have respect For victors but not beings?
It’s not from qualities of intention But due to the results That beings have qualities like theirs And therefore are their equals.
Offering to those with loving-kindness Is sentient beings’ greatness. The merit of having faith in the buddhas Is the buddhas’ greatness.
For gaining a buddha’s traits, they have A part and are thus equal. Infinite oceans of qualities, The buddhas are equaled by none.
Offering even the three realms To those who appear to have A tiny share of the qualities Of those who are the unique Collection of sublime qualities Would be inadequate.
Since beings have a part in the birth Of a buddha’s supreme traits, They’re similar to that extent And thus deserve veneration.
Other than pleasing sentient beings, What way is there to repay Those stalwart friends who act to bring Immeasurable benefit?
Since helping them repays those who forsake Their bodies and go to the Incessant Hell, Even when they inflict on you great harm, Make all your actions solely excellent.
Meanwhile, how is it I—an ignoramus— Am prideful and don’t act like a true servant To those for whose sake they who are my lords Have disregarded even their own bodies?
Making them happy, whose happiness delights And injuries distress the lords of sages, Brings all the lords of sages gratification, While harming them brings injury to the sages.
Just as no object of desire will bring Happiness when your body is on fire, If you harm sentient beings, there is no way That those with great compassion could be pleased.
Therefore I now confess all my misdeeds, Which, as they have caused harm to sentient beings, Distress all those endowed with great compassion. May all those whom I have displeased forgive me.
To please the tathagatas, from today onward I shall be the world’s slave. I won’t strike back, No matter how many people stomp my crown Or kill me. Guardians of the world, be happy!
There’s no doubt they whose nature is compassion Regard all of these beings as themselves. Those who are seen as sentient beings in nature Are guardians in essence—why disrespect them?
Just this is what will please the tathagatas. Just this is what fulfills my very own aims. Just this dispels the sufferings of the world, And therefore I will always do just this.
Just as, when one of the king’s men Wreaks havoc on many people, Even if able, the farsighted Do not retaliate
For he is not alone—his forces Are the forces of the king— Likewise do not look down upon Weak people who cause harm,
For theirs are the forces of hell’s keepers And of the compassionate. Just as his subjects propitiate A tyrant, respect beings.
Even if angered, could a king Inflict what is experienced Because of making beings despair— The agonies of hell?
Even if pleased, a king could not Provide what is achieved By making sentient beings happy— Buddhahood itself.
Leave future buddhahood aside, Do you not see in this life That pleasing sentient beings brings Much glory, fame, and joy?
While in samsara, patience brings Beauty and so forth, Good health, prestige, a very long life, And a chakravarti’s pleasures.
Thus with patience, be diligent. Enlightenment dwells in striving so. There is no motion without wind; No merit without diligence.
Diligence is a zest for virtue. What’s contrary to that? To explain, It’s laziness—clinging to the bad And sloth and self-disparagement.
Laziness arises from Not wearying of samsaric pain, From craving sleep and savoring The pleasures of being indolent.
Stalked by the hunters, the afflictions, You’ve walked into the trap of birth. Yet do you still not understand You’ve entered the maw of the Lord of Death?
Have you not seen that your compeers Are being killed, one after another? Still, even so you fall asleep, Just like a buffalo with a butcher.
When all around the ways are blocked And the Lord of Death is watching you, How is it you enjoy your food? How can you like so much to sleep?
You will die soon, so until then Gather the accumulations. For then, when there is no more time To give up sloth, what will you do?
This is undone, this just begun, And this remains but halfway done. The Lord of Death will suddenly come, And you will think, “Alas, I’m finished!”
You’ll watch your relatives lose all hope As tears from shock of grief roll down Their faces, their eyes red and swollen. You’ll see the faces of Yama’s henchmen.
Recalling your misdeeds with anguish And hearing the din of hell, the dread Will make you foul yourself with filth. You’ll be in torment—what will you do?
If like a living, writhing fish, You have such terror in this life, What of the intense suffering Of hell from the misdeeds you’ve done?
Your flesh is tender when it’s touched By scalding water, yet you have done The karma of the hottest hells. Why do you stay so comfortably?
You want results without any effort— Such pain for one so delicate! When grasped by death, you’re like a god. Alas! Suffering will destroy you!
Free yourself with the human boat From the great river of suffering. Such a boat is hard to get again. Now is no time for sleep, you fool.
Forsaking the sublime joy of dharma, The cause of infinite delight, Why do you relish such distractions And games that will cause suffering?
Don’t be discouraged; practice with The forces, purpose, and self-control: The equality of self and others And exchanging yourself for others.
Don’t get demoralized and think, “How is it I could be awakened?” For the Tathagata who speaks The truth has spoken truly thus:
If they should rouse the strength of effort, Even gnats, mosquitoes, bees, and worms Will gain what is so hard to achieve— Unexcelled enlightenment.
If I, born in the human race, Can recognize what helps and harms And don’t give up enlightened conduct, Why wouldn’t I reach enlightenment?
“But I’m afraid of sacrificing My limbs and such,” I say, not thinking What is severe and what is light— Delusion has left me in fear.
For countless millions of aeons, I will be hacked and stabbed and burnt And rent asunder many times, But not achieve enlightenment.
The suffering for me to achieve Enlightenment, though, has a limit, Like pain from an incision made To excise a painful foreign object.
All physicians cure disease Through the discomfort of a treatment. Therefore put up with small distress To overcome myriad sufferings.
The Supreme Physician does not use Commonplace treatments such as those. He cures unfathomably great diseases With the most gentle of remedies.
Initially, the Guide prescribes Giving away vegetables and the like. Eventually, when used to that, You will be able to give your flesh.
For once you understand your body To be like vegetables and such, What difficulty would there be In relinquishing your flesh and such?
There is no pain from giving up wrong, No melancholy from being wise, For harm to the body is from misdeeds And harm to the mind from misconceptions.
If physical pleasure is from merit And mental pleasure from being wise, Would the compassionate despair To stay in samsara for others’ sake?
Because the power of bodhichitta Exhausts one’s misdeeds from the past And gathers oceans of merit, it’s taught That they surpass the shravakas.
So ride the horse of bodhichitta That banishes all weariness. Who in their senses would be lazy To go from one joy to the next?
To benefit beings, the forces are Longing, steadfastness, joy, and deferring. Longing is born of fearing suffering And contemplating its benefits.
Thus give up what is contrary. By force of effort and mastery Of longing, pride, joy, putting aside, Strive to increase your diligence.
My own and others’ infinite wrongs Are mine indeed to eliminate, But every single fault will take An ocean of aeons to extinguish,
And I don’t see that I’ve begun To exhaust them even the slightest bit. Infinite suffering is my lot; Why does my heart not burst apart?
My own and others’ numerous Qualities are for me to accomplish, And though each quality will take An ocean of aeons to cultivate,
I’ve never cultivated even A fraction of a quality. It is astounding how I’ve squandered This birth that somehow I’ve achieved.
I haven’t worshipped the Bhagavan Or given the pleasures of great feasts. I have not acted for the teachings, Fulfilled the wishes of the poor,
Provided safety to those in fear, Or given comfort to the wretched. All I’ve created is suffering And pain inside my mother’s womb.
Because I have not longed for dharma, Such tribulations have occurred To me before and even now. Who would forsake the wish for dharma?
The Sage has said the basis of Everything virtuous is longing. The root of that is meditating On the full ripening of results.
Sufferings, unhappiness, Dangers of assorted types, And deprivation of desires Occur because of committing misdeeds.
Wherever they go, those who perform The virtue that their heart desires Will be welcomed with offerings Resulting from their acts of merit.
Wherever they go, those who commit Misdeeds, though they want happiness, Will be destroyed because of their wrongs By the weapons of suffering.
From virtues, you will dwell within the heart Of a vast, cool, and fragrant lotus flower, Where nourished by the pleasing voices of The victors, you will grow in majesty. And when, because of light rays from the sages, The lotus blossoms, you will then emerge Before the victors with a supreme body— You will become a child of the sugatas.
But from your many nonvirtues, the henchmen Of Yama will entirely flay your skin, And you will be most miserable and wretched. Then molten copper melted over the most Intense of fires will pour all over your body, And blows rained down by blazing swords and spears Will hack your flesh into a hundred pieces, And you will fall onto the burning iron ground.
Therefore you should long for virtue And cultivate it with dedication. Once started, meditate on pride With the methods from the Vajradhvaja.
Examine first your resources And then begin or don’t begin. Not starting may well be the best; Do not turn back once you’ve begun.
For with that habit, in other lives Misdeeds and suffering will increase, Or else the time of the result Will be diminished, unaccomplished.
Be prideful of these three: your acts, Afflictions, and ability. To say, “I shall do this alone,” Is in itself the pride of action.
The worldly, overcome by afflictions, Cannot accomplish their own good. Beings are not as able as I, And therefore I’ll do this myself.
How can I just sit there when Another does the menial work? If out of pride, I won’t do that, It’s best for me to have no pride.
When it encounters a dead snake, Even a crow acts like a garuda. When I myself am weak, a downfall— Even if small—will cause me harm.
Can there be freedom from privation For the disheartened who have stopped trying? It’s hard for even the great to best Those who have roused their pride and effort.
Therefore with a steadfast mind, I’ll vanquish downfalls. If instead They conquer me, my wish to triumph Over the three realms is laughable.
I’ll be victorious over all. I will let nothing vanquish me. A child of the lion, the Victor, I shall abide within such pride.
Those beings whom pride has subjugated Do not have pride; they are afflicted. They have succumbed to the foe pride— The proud are not controlled by foes.
Inflated by afflicted pride, That pride will lead you to lower realms, Destroying the feast of being human. A slave who feeds on others’ scraps, You will be stupid, ugly, and weak.
You’ll be reviled everywhere. If wretched folk inflated with pride Are also counted among the proud, Do say, then, what the lowly are like.
Those who grasp pride in order to defeat the enemy pride, They are the proud, the victorious who are themselves the heroes. The ones who thus destroy the growing enemy of pride Will perfect the result of victory that beings desire.
Amidst the crowd of the afflictions, Persevere in a thousand ways. Like lions with jackals, do not let The hosts of the afflictions strike.
No matter how great the danger is, People always guard their eyes. Likewise when you are in grave peril, Do not fall under afflictions’ control.
It’s better to be burnt to death Or have my head decapitated— Never in any way shall I Bow to the enemy, affliction.
Likewise in every situation, I’ll never act any way but right.
Like wanting the pleasure that results From play, they are enchanted with The acts that are for them to do— Delighted, never satisfied.
We act for sake of happiness, Not knowing whether pleasure will come. How can all those whose deeds are pleasure Be happy if they do not act?
If you aren’t sated by desires, Which are like honey on a razor, How can you then be sated by merit, Whose ripening is peace and pleasure?
So therefore to complete your task, Immerse yourself in action, like An elephant scorched in midday sun Who sees a lake and plunges in.
But when your strength diminishes, Put work aside to act again later. Once it’s well done, leave it behind— Look forward to the next and later.
Like parrying the enemy’s blade When you are in the thick of battle, Evade the weapons of afflictions, And strike the foe afflictions hard.
If you should drop your sword in battle, You’d swiftly pick it up from fear. If you lose mindfulness—your weapon— Take it up quickly, fearing hell.
Just as a poison spreads throughout The body through the flow of blood, Likewise if they can get a chance, Your wrongs will spread throughout your mind.
Practitioners should concentrate, As fearful as someone holding a bowl That brims with oil before a swordsman Who threatens death if any spills.
So just as you would spring up quick If a snake should get into your lap, If sleep and slothfulness should come, Then counteract them with great haste.
For every single wrong that occurs, Chastise yourself and ponder long, “However I can, I’ll make it so This never happens to me again.”
“In circumstances such as this, How shall I practice mindfulness?” With that as cause, you should seek out A meeting and appropriate action.
Before you act, no matter what, To have the strength for everything, Recall the words on carefulness So that you will be light and nimble.
As tufts of cotton are directed By wind as it moves to and fro, So, too, is all accomplished under Direction of enthusiasm.
After thus rousing diligence, Settle your mind into samadhi. A person whose mind wanders perches Between the fangs of the afflictions.
With solitude of body and mind, Distraction won’t occur. So you should thus forsake the world And also give up discursive thoughts.
You won’t renounce the world if attached Or else if you crave goods and such. In order to abandon those, The wise should contemplate like this:
Realizing that afflictions are destroyed By shamatha and insight in conjunction, First seek out shamatha, which comes from joy For having no attachment to the world.
Who is someone ephemeral To cling to the impermanent? In a thousand lives, you’ll never see The ones who were so dear to you.
Not seeing them, you’ll feel no joy. Your mind won’t rest in equipoise. Even seeing them won’t be enough— Craving will plague you as before.
Being attached to sentient beings Obscures completely the true nature And wrecks world weariness as well. Grief will torment you in the end.
Because you only think of them, Your life will pass by pointlessly. Inconstant friends and relatives Will ruin even constant dharma.
Acting the same as childish folk, You’ll surely go to the lower realms. They lead you to unsuitable states— What good’s the company of fools?
One moment, friends, but in the next They’re enemies. They are incensed By what should please them. It is hard To gratify ordinary beings.
Angered by talk of what is helpful, They turn me away from my own welfare. If I don’t listen to their words, They’ll go to lower realms, enraged.
They’re jealous of superiors; Competitive with their own equals. They’re proud toward their inferiors And arrogant when they are praised. When you reproach them, they get angry. When is there benefit from the childish?
When you keep company with the childish, You praise yourself, belittle others, Talk of samsara and such with them— Nonvirtue inevitably occurs.
In this way, my associating With them will only bring me ruin. They will not bring me benefit, And I won’t benefit them either.
Flee far away from childish folk. Be friendly when you do meet them, And without getting too familiar, Dispassionately behave well.
Just like a bee with flower nectar, I’ll only take for dharma’s sake And live unacquainted with anyone, As though I’d never seen them before.
“I get a lot and am respected; Many people are fond of me.” If you cling to conceits like these, You will face terrors after death.
The passions of a deluded mind, Whatever it may be they are for, Are multiplied a thousand times To then rise up as suffering.
Therefore the wise do not desire. It’s from desires that fear arises. They’ll be discarded naturally, So understand this and be steadfast.
Even if you gain many things And become popular and renowned, It is uncertain where you’ll go Along with all those goods and fame.
When someone else disparages me, What joy is there for me in praise? When someone else is lauding me, Why be displeased when I am slandered?
If even buddhas cannot please Beings with various inclinations, What need to speak of a wretch like me? Thus I will give up worldly thoughts.
They revile people who get nothing And speak ill of those who get much. What pleasure comes from those whose nature Is to be hard to get along with?
As the tathagatas have said, No childish being is a friend Because unless it suits their purpose, The childish are not gratified.
In forests, animals and birds And trees don’t speak disparagingly. When is it I will live together With them, whose company is pleasant?
When will it be that I can stay In caves or in abandoned temples Or under trees, not looking back, And not attached to anything?
When will it be that I can dwell In places naturally vast That no one owns where I can act In freedom and without attachment?
When will I keep a plain alms bowl And such, and clothes that no one wants? When will I live free from all fear Even if I don’t protect this body?
When will I go to charnel grounds To see that other people’s bones And my own body are the same In being perishable things?
This body of my very own Will also become just like those Whose stench is such that even jackals Will not come anywhere close to them.
This body is born all alone, And if the flesh and bones born with it Will fall apart, be strewn about, What need to speak of other friends?
At birth, it’s born alone; at death, It dies alone. If no one else Can take a share of the pain, what good Are loved ones who make hindrances?
In the same way as travelers Take lodging when they’re on the road, Those on the pathways of existence Take lodging in a place of birth.
Up to the time when four pallbearers Would carry it away from there While people mournfully lament, Till then I shall go to the forest.
With no friends and no grudges either, This body’ll stay in solitude. Considered as if dead already, There’ll be no mourners when it dies.
With no one seated at my side To cause disturbances and grief, There’s no one to distract me from Recalling the buddha and so forth.
Thus I’ll remain in solitude, In the delightful atmosphere Of joyful forests with few hardships, Where all distractions are quieted.
Relinquishing all other thoughts And with one-pointed mental focus, I’ll strive to settle my mind down In equipoise and to subdue it.
In this world and the next one too, Desires will lead you to your ruin. Here they bring killing, bonds, and wounds, And in the next, the hells and such.
The one for whom you earlier Made many requests through go-betweens, For whose sake you did not refrain From misdeeds or even from disgrace,
For whom you put yourself in peril And also used up all your wealth, The one whose tight embrace would bring The highest pleasure is nothing but
A skeleton—not anything else. What you have lusted for and clung to Has no control, is not a self. Why don’t you go to nirvana instead?
You first took pains to lift her face, But she then bashfully looked down. Whether you’d seen it before or not, It had been shrouded by a veil.
The thought of it afflicted you, But now her face is visible— You see what vultures have revealed, And why does it now make you flee?
You guarded it so closely from The glance of anyone else’s eyes. Why don’t you, who are so possessive, Protect it when it’s being eaten?
You see the pile of flesh that vultures And other animals devour. Would you give someone else’s food Garlands, perfumes, and jewelry?
Seeing it as a skeleton, You’re frightened, though it does not move. Why aren’t you scared when, like a zombie, It’s animated by something else?
You lusted for it when it was covered, So why not when it is uncovered? If it will serve no purpose, why Would you embrace it when it’s covered?
Since both saliva and excrement Are made out of the very same food, Why of the two do you dislike Excrement and yet like saliva?
Not even taking pleasure in A cotton pillow soft to the touch, The lustful say it exudes no stench. They are deluded about filth.
Though cotton may be soft to touch, Deluded, lowly, lustful people Get angry over it and say That it’s unable to make love.
If you have no desire for filth, Why then embrace another person, A cage of bones that’s bound by sinews And plastered with the mud of flesh?
You have a lot of filth yourself— You should be satisfied with that. Thirsting for the unclean, you lust For yet another sack of filth.
Saying “This flesh is what I like,” You want to touch and gaze on it. Then why don’t you desire the flesh That is devoid of conscious nature?
The consciousness that you desire Cannot be touched or looked upon. What can be is not consciousness. Why bother with a pointless embrace?
Not realizing another’s body Is filth by nature is no surprise. Not realizing that you yourself Are filth itself is most amazing.
Why does your mind, addicted to filth, Neglect the fresh, young lotus flower Blooming beneath the cloudless sunlight And love instead a cage of filth?
If you have no desire to touch A place befouled by excrement, Why would you want to touch the body Out of which it originates?
If filth is not what you desire, Then why do you embrace another? The field from which they were born was filth, As were the seeds, as was what grew them.
You do not want the unclean worms Born from manure, even though they’re tiny, And yet you want what’s born from filth, A body of plentiful filth by nature.
Not only do you not revile Yourself whose nature is unclean, You want another bag of feces, Voraciously desiring filth.
When you put some nice camphor and such Or even rice and vegetables Inside your mouth and spit it out, The ground is dirtied and polluted.
If even though it’s evident, You doubt that this is so unclean, Then look at other, fetid bodies Discarded in the charnel grounds.
And when the skin is flayed from it, You know you will be terrified, And yet how is it you are still Attracted to the very same thing?
The fragrance applied to the body Is nothing else but sandalwood. Why does the scent of something else Allure you, then, to someone else?
Is it not best to not be attracted To this, which naturally smells foul? Why do the worldly, pointlessly craving, Perfume it with nice fragrances?
If that sweet scent is sandalwood, What is it here the body emits? Why would you be attracted to someone Because of something else’s scent?
The body naturally has Long hair and nails, stained whitish teeth. It reeks, besmeared with grimy muck. If naked, it is terrifying.
Why do you toil to polish up What’s like a sword that injures you? Those crazed by efforts of self-delusion Have set the entire earth in turmoil.
If seeing only skeletons In charnel grounds repulses you, Can you like charnel towns that teem With animated skeletons?
That which is in this way unclean Cannot be got without a cost— Exhaustion from earning for its sake And wounds in hells and other realms.
Children aren’t able to earn money. In youth, how is this happiness? You use your life up gathering wealth. When old, what good are your desires?
Some passionate but humble folk, Exhausted by a full day’s work, Return home only to lay down Their worn-out bodies like a corpse.
Others might go abroad and suffer From weariness and long hard travel. They wish to see their wives and children But won’t see them for a whole year.
Deluded by want for their own ends, They sell themselves to help themselves. Not gaining that, they’re driven by The winds of others’ futile work.
Some sell their bodies and are put To work for others, with no freedom. The women give birth under trees Or in the wild, wherever they can.
Saying they want a livelihood, Fools who are duped by their desires Fear for their lives but go to battle Or enter servitude for profit.
Some greedy beings get themselves wounded, While others are impaled on stakes. There are those who are gored by spears, And some are even burnt alive.
Know the travails of getting, keeping, and losing it Make wealth a never-ending source of ill. For those whom greed for wealth distracts, there is no chance For freedom from the suffering of existence.
For the desirous, faults like these Are plentiful, but gains are few, Just as the oxen pulling a cart Get only a few bites of grass.
For sake of paltry gains so common That even oxen manage them, These perfect leisures and resources, Which are so difficult to get, Are crushed by the ordeals of karma.
For just a millionth fraction of The arduous efforts that they make Continually for minor ends— Pleasures that definitely perish
And cast them to the hells and such— They could be buddhas, but the greedy, Instead of awakened conduct, have Great miseries and no awakening.
Considering the sufferings Of hell and so forth, there’s no weapon, No poison, fire, abyss, or foe That can compare to the desires.
Thus weary yourself of desires And rouse delight for solitude. Deep in a peaceful forest free Of quarrels and disturbances,
On broad flat stones—delightful palaces Cooled by the sandalwood of the moon’s rays— The fortunate pace, fanned by a woodland breeze, Serene and silent, pondering other’s weal.
In empty huts, by trees, or else in caves, You may remain as long as you desire. The pains of getting and keeping left behind, You live without a care, dependent on none.
To freely act with no desires And without ties to anyone— Enjoyable comfort of contentment Is hard for even a prince to find.
Once you’ve reflected on these and other Advantages of solitude, Then fully pacify your thoughts And meditate on bodhichitta.
First meditate ardently upon The equality of self and other. They’re equal in both pain and pleasure, So protect everyone like yourself.
Although of many different kinds, the hands and so forth Are one as a body to protect. Likewise though beings Are different and separate in their joys and pains, They all are equal, the same as me in wanting comfort.
Even though my own suffering Does not cause harm to others’ bodies, My suffering is unbearable Because of ego-clinging.
Likewise the sufferings of others Have no effect on me, but still Their suffering is unbearable Because of ego-clinging.
I will dispel others’ suffering Since it is suffering, like my own. I shall bring benefit to others Since they are beings, like my body.
For when both I and others are The same in wanting to be happy And they’re no different from me, Why only work for my own pleasure?
And when both I and others are The same in wanting not to suffer And they’re no different from me, Then why protect myself, not others?
If I will not protect them since Their suffering does not cause me harm, Then future suffering as well Does not harm me—why guard against it?
It is erroneous to think, “It’s me who will experience it,” Because it is one being who dies And yet another who is born.
If they whose suffering it is Themselves must guard themselves from it, Since the foot’s pain is not the hand’s, Why should the one protect the other?
“Even though it’s illogical, We act from ego-clinging,” you say. We must, as much as possible, Give up fallacious selves and others.
Continua and aggregates, Like series, armies, and such, are false. The suffering one does not exist, So who is it that this belongs to?
That suffering has no owner is No different for anyone. I will dispel it since it’s painful— In this, why should I set a limit?
There’s no dispute the suffering Of everyone must be prevented. If mine’s prevented, prevent all. Or else, like beings’, not mine either.
“Compassion is too painful,” you say, “So why arouse it with such effort?” But when you think of beings’ torments, How is the pain of compassion greater?
For if a single suffering Eliminates many miseries, Those with compassion will induce That suffering in themselves and others.
Thus even though Supushpachandra Knew that the king would cause him harm, He did not shy away from pain To end the sufferings of many.
Those who have trained their own mind streams Will enter even the Incessant With joy for quelling others’ woes, Like swans alighting on lotus ponds.
When beings have been liberated, Is not the ocean of joy that brings Sufficient in and of itself? What good is wanting liberation?
So though I have done good for others, I’m not conceited or amazed. Solely enjoying helping others, I’ve no hope for a ripened result.
Thus just as I protect myself From any blame, no matter how slight, For others, I will likewise be Protective and compassionate.
Just as, due to habituation, I know the drops of blood and semen That came from others as myself, Though that has no reality,
Why don’t I similarly grasp The bodies of other beings as me? It also is not difficult To see my body as someone else.
Knowing that I have faults while others Are oceans of good qualities, I’ll meditate on giving up Self-clinging while adopting others.
In the same way as we accept That hands and such are body parts, Why do we not likewise accept The living are a part of the world?
The thought this selfless body is me Arose due to habituation, So why will the idea others Are me not come with habituation?
So though I have done good for others, I’m not conceited or amazed, Just as there’s no hope for return When I eat my own food myself.
Thus just as I protect myself From any blame, no matter how slight, I’ll cultivate compassionate, Protective thoughts for beings.
That is why Avalokiteshvara From his compassion, blessed his name To soothe the fears that wanderers Have even of being among people.
Do not turn back from difficulty— From the power of habituation, Though someone’s name did once strike fear, Without them, you will feel no joy.
All those who wish to swiftly give Protection to themselves and others Should practice the most excellent secret, The exchange of self and other.
Due to attachment to our bodies, We’re scared by even the smallest fright. Who wouldn’t abhor this fearsome body As if it were an enemy?
From the desire to cure the illness Of hunger, thirst, and such, the body Will make you kill birds, fish, and deer And wait in ambush by the road.
And if it makes you kill your parents Or steal what’s offered the three jewels For sake of gain or else respect So you’ll be burned in the Incessant,
No one who’s wise would want that body, Nor would they shield or venerate it. Who would not look at it and see An enemy? Who would not scorn it?
“If I give this, what will I enjoy?” Such selfish thoughts are the way of fiends. “If I enjoy this, what can I give?” Such altruism is divine dharma.
If you harm others for your own sake, You’ll be tormented in hell and elsewhere. If you are harmed for others’ sake, You will gain everything excellent.
Those who want high rank for themselves Become lowly dolts in lower realms, But those who pass it on to others Will gain respect in the high realms.
If you use others for selfish ends, You will experience servitude. Using yourself for others’ sake, You will experience lordliness.
All happiness in the world is born Of wishing others happiness. All suffering in the world is born Of wanting happiness for yourself.
What need is there to explain at length? The childish act for their own ends; The sages act for others’ sake. Look at the difference between them.
If you do not exchange your pleasures For other beings’ miseries, You will not achieve buddhahood Or have any happiness in samsara.
No need to mention the next life. In this life, servants who don’t work And masters who do not pay wages Will also not achieve their aims.
Fools throw away the perfect pleasure Of gaining seen and unseen joys, And, causing others misery, They take on terrible suffering.
All of the violence in the world And all the fear and suffering Arise from clinging to a self. What does that ogre do for me?
Without relinquishing your self, You can’t abandon suffering. Just as without relinquishing fire, You cannot avoid getting burned.
Therefore to calm harms to myself And pacify others’ suffering, I’ll give myself away to others And cling to others as myself.
Mind, understand with certainty That I am owned by other beings. Now do not think of anything else Than benefiting sentient beings.
It is not right to gain selfish ends With eyes and such that others own. It is not right to treat them badly With eyes that are for their benefit.
Therefore I will put beings first. Anything I see on my body, I’ll take away and put to use For sake of benefiting others.
Make the inferior and so forth Yourself and make yourself the other. Then meditate without any thought On envy, rivalry, and pride.
“They are respected; I am not. I do not get as much as them. They’re praised, while I am ridiculed, And they are happy, while I suffer.
“I am the one who does the work, But they live comfortably indeed. They’re known in society as great, While it’s said I’ve no qualities.
“No qualities? What can I do? But I have all the qualities. There are some they’re inferior to And some I am superior to.
“My discipline, views, and so forth are Corrupted due to the afflictions. I’ve no control, so they should cure me As best they can; I’ll take the pain.
“But I’m not someone they would heal. Why do they treat me with contempt? If they’re a person with qualities, What use are their qualities to me?
“They’ve no compassion for those inside The maws of the dread lower realms. Conceited with external virtues, They want to vie against the wise.”
When I see those who are my peers, “To make myself superior, I’ll get their things and gain respect Even if I must fight for it.
“No matter what, I’ll make it so My qualities are world renowned. I’ll make sure no one ever hears Of any of their qualities.
“Furthermore, I will hide my faults So I am honored and they aren’t. Now I will easily get goods And be respected—they will not.
“When they act inappropriately, I’ll watch for a long time with glee. I will make them a laughingstock That all revile among themselves.”
“This wretch is trying to rival me, It’s said, but can they be my equal In learning or intelligence, In body, stature, or in wealth?
“When they hear of my qualities That are well known to everyone, Let them experience the rapture Of feeling shivers of delight.
“Although they might possess some wealth, We’ll take it all away by force, And if they do some work for us, We’ll give them just enough to live.
“We will deprive them of happiness And always yoke them to our torments. This one wrought miseries for us Hundreds of times in all samsara.”
O mind, you have spent countless aeons Wanting to benefit yourself, But even with such great ordeals, You’ve only created suffering.
Therefore you must apply yourself Completely to benefiting others. Later you’ll see the merits in this— The Sage’s words are undeceiving.
If you had done these acts before, A situation such as this That’s not a buddha’s perfect bliss Would never have been possible.
And therefore, just as you have clung To drops of others’ sperm and blood As being yourself, likewise you must Meditate thus for others too.
You should act as a spy for others. When you see anything on your body, Then take away that very thing And use it to benefit other beings.
“I’m comfortable; others are not. I’m high in stature; others are low, And I am helped, while others aren’t.” Why aren’t you envious of yourself?
Deprive yourself of happiness. Take others’ suffering on yourself. When you think, “What is this one doing?” Examine your own deficiencies.
Even the wrongs that others do Must be transformed into your own faults. Even the minor wrongs you do Must be confessed to many people.
Proclaim especially others’ fame, So that it will outshine your own. Employ yourself to all their ends As if you were the lowest slave.
This one is rife with faults by nature, So do not praise their fleeting virtues. Do all you can so no one knows Anything of their qualities.
In brief, for your own selfish sake, You have caused injuries to others. Now make it so, for beings’ sake, That all the harm will fall on you.
Don’t let this one be impetuous In arrogant and headstrong ways. Instead, leave it like a new bride Who’s shy and fearful and restrained.
“Do that! You must remain like this! And you must never act like that!” Exert your power over it; Punish it if it disobeys.
If, mind, you will not act like that Even though I have told you to, You will indeed be subjugated, Since all wrongs are because of you.
The bygone days when you were able To ruin me were different. I see wherever you go now. I’ll destroy all your vanity.
Give up the idea that you still Have purposes of your very own. Since I have sold you off to others, Offer your strength without despair.
If I get careless and do not Deliver you to sentient beings, It’s certain you’ll deliver me Down to the keepers of the hells.
I’ve suffered long the many times That you have given me away. Now I remember my resentment. I shall destroy your selfish thoughts.
Therefore if you want to be pleased, Do not make pleasure for yourself. If you want to protect yourself, Continuously protect others.
The more that I protect this body, The more it gets too tender and falls.
If the desires of one who’s fallen In such a way can’t be fulfilled By even this entire earth, Who is there that can meet their wants?
Insatiable desires produce Afflictions and degenerate thoughts. Those not dependent on anything Have never-ending excellence.
So don’t give physical desires An opportunity to grow. Not clinging to anything as being Desirable is the finest thing.
In the end, it will end up as ash, Unmoving, moved by someone else. Why do I grasp at this unclean And frightening form as being me?
No matter whether it’s live or dead, What use have I of this machine? If it’s no different from a clod, Alas, why not be rid of pride?
Because of doting on this body, I’ve brought myself pointless miseries. What use is getting attached or angry For this, which is the same as wood?
Thus whether I take care of it, Or vultures and the like consume it, It feels no attachment or aversion, So why am I attached to it?
If it is not itself aware Of anger when it is disparaged And pleasure when it is admired, Who am I tiring myself for?
If you should say that someone who Is fond of this body is my friend, Everyone’s fond of their own body, So why am I not fond of them?
So I’ll give up, without attachment, This body for wanderers’ benefit. Therefore, though it has many faults, I’ll keep it, using it to act.
I’ve had enough of childish conduct. I’ll follow the footsteps of the wise. Recalling the words on carefulness, I’ll ward off sleep and sluggishness.
Like the compassionate bodhisattvas, I’ll have the proper fortitude. If I don’t strive both day and night, When will my sufferings reach an end?
Thus to dispel the obscurations, I’ll turn my mind from the wrong paths, And I will rest continuously In equipoise with the right focus.
The Sage taught all these preparations For the sake of prajna, So those who wish to pacify Suffering should develop prajna.
The relative and ultimate Are stated to be the two truths. The ultimate is not mind’s sphere; It’s said that mind is relative.
With those, two types of people are seen, The yogic and the ordinary. Of these two, ordinary people Are confuted by the yogic.
Due to distinctions of intellect, Higher yogis confute the lower By analogies that both accept, Left unexamined for the result.
As worldly people think that things Are real just as they are perceived And not illusory, the yogis Dispute the worldly over this.
It is consensus, not valid knowledge, That there’s perception of form and such. Like the consensus the unclean Is clean and so forth, it is false.
In order to introduce the worldly, The Buddha taught that there are things. In fact, they are not momentary. “That contradicts the relative.”
The yogic relative has no fault. Compared to worldly, it’s seeing suchness, Or else the worldly could refute Their recognizing bodies as filth.
The merit from illusory victors Is like that from existent ones. “If beings are illusory, After they die, how are they born?”
Illusions will arise as long As the conditions are assembled. Does merely lasting a long time Mean sentient beings truly exist?
Killing illusory beings and such Are not misdeeds—they have no mind. But merit and misdeeds arise With those who have illusory minds.
Since spells and such don’t have that power, Illusory minds do not arise. Produced by various conditions, Illusions are various as well.
Nowhere is there a single condition That’s capable of everything. “If beings still cycle relatively, Though ultimately, they’re nirvana,
“Then even buddhas would transmigrate— Why bother with the way of bodhi?” Unless the continuum of conditions Is severed, illusions will not cease.
They won’t arise, even relatively, When the conditions have been severed. “If confused mind does not exist, What is it that observes illusions?”
But if for you, the illusion itself Does not exist, then what’s observed? “In suchness, there is something else; That image is the mind itself.”
If mind itself is illusory, At that time, what is seen by what? And the Protector of the World Has said, “Mind is not seen by mind.”
A sword blade cannot cut itself, And it is just the same with mind. If you say it is like a lamp Illuminating its own nature,
A lamp is not illuminated, For it is not obscured by darkness. “Unlike a crystal, blue does not Depend on something else for blueness.
“Likewise, it’s seen some things depend On something else, and some do not.” A thing that is not blue itself Does not itself make itself blue.
There is a consciousness that knows And says a lamp is luminous, But what is it that knows and says That mind is luminous itself?
Whether it’s luminous or not, If it’s not seen by anything, Like the charms of a barren woman’s daughter, Even discussing it is pointless.
“If self-awareness doesn’t exist, Then how is consciousness remembered?” When something else is experienced, It is recalled from the connection, Like the venom of a rat.
“It’s seen by those with other conditions, So it illuminates itself.” When magic eye salve is applied, You see a vase but not the salve.
How things are seen or heard or known Is not what is rebutted here. Here it’s the cause of suffering— The thought they’re true—that is refuted.
If you think that illusions are neither Other than mind nor the same as it, If real, then how are they not other? If they’re not other, it is not real.
What’s seen—illusion—is not true, And neither is the seer, mind. “Samsara must have a real basis, Otherwise it would be like space.”
How does being based upon the real Mean the unreal performs an action? That mind of yours, with no companion, Would be entirely alone.
When mind is free of the apprehended, Then all become tathagatas. In that case, what’s the benefit Of thinking there is only mind?
“But how does merely knowing that All is illusion stop afflictions? Illusionists may still feel lust For dreamlike lovers they create.”
Their makers have not yet abandoned The imprints of afflictions toward Known objects, so when they see them, Their imprint of emptiness is weak.
Ingraining the imprint of emptiness Eliminates the imprint of things. By meditating, “Nothing exists,” It also is abandoned later.
When one says “Nothing exists,” the thing That’s being examined isn’t observed. Deprived of basis, how can nothing Remain before the mind?
And then when neither thing nor nothing Remains before the mind, Because there is no other way, There is no focus—utter peace.
Just as a wish-fulfilling jewel And heaven tree fill every wish, The kayas of the victors appear Due to disciples and aspirations.
The builder of the garuda pillar Passed away after it was blessed, But it still neutralizes poisons And such long after he is gone.
A bodhisattva, following The way of awakening, will build A victor’s pillar and pass to Nirvana, yet perform all deeds.
“How is it making offerings To one who has no mind bears fruit?” This has been taught to be the same, Whether they’re present or in nirvana.
There are results, according to scripture, Whether they’re relative or suchness, Just as there would be a result From a true buddha, for example.
“One can be freed by seeing the truths; Why bother seeing emptiness?” Because there’s no awakening Without this path, the scriptures teach.
If the Great Vehicle is not proven, How is it that your scriptures are? “Because they’re proven to us both.” At first, they were not proven to you.
The reasons for believing in them Are the same for the Great Vehicle too. If they’re true since two parties accept them, The Vedas and such would also be true.
If it’s because the Great Vehicle Is in dispute, reject your own scriptures Since they’re contested by non-Buddhists, As are some you and others challenge.
The teachings’ root is bhikshuhood, But bhikshuhood is difficult. For those whose minds still have a focus, Reaching nirvana is difficult.
If one is freed just by discarding Afflictions, it’s immediate. Yet it is seen that karma has power Over those who do not have afflictions.
If at that time, it’s definite That they do not have the cause, craving, Why don’t they have, just like delusion, The unafflicted craving too?
Craving is due to the condition Of feeling, and they do have feeling. A mind that has a focus dwells On one thing or another.
As with conception-free absorption, A mind that lacks in emptiness Might cease but will arise again, So meditate on emptiness.
If you accept as the Buddha’s teachings The words included in the sutras, Don’t you accept the Great Vehicle Is mostly the same as your sutras?
If all of them are flawed because A single one is not included, Then since one sutra is the same, Why aren’t they all the Buddha’s words?
Just because you don’t understand The teachings Mahakashyapa And so forth did not truly fathom, Who says they’re not to be accepted?
Freed from extremes of greed and fear, To stay in samsara for the sake Of those who suffer due to delusion Is the result of emptiness.
The refutations of the position Of emptiness are not reasonable, So do not harbor any doubts, And meditate on emptiness.
The remedy for the darkness of The cognitive and afflictive veils Is emptiness. Wouldn’t they who want Omniscience quickly cultivate it?
If fearfulness is born out of The things that produce suffering, Then why is it that emptiness, The cure for suffering, provokes dread?
If there existed any me, There could be fear of anything. But since no me exists at all, Who is there that could be afraid?
Teeth and hair and nails aren’t me. Bones and blood are not me either. Mucus is not, and phlegm is not, And neither lymph nor pus is me.
Fat is not me; sweat is not me; Nor are the lungs or liver me. Neither are the other organs. Feces and urine are not me.
Muscles and skin and body heat And breath aren’t me. The orifices Are not me, or in any way Are the six consciousnesses either.
If the cognition of sound were permanent, Sound would be apprehended at all times. When there is nothing to be known, what knows? And why is it described as a cognition?
If it is a cognition without knowing, It follows blocks of wood are cognition too. Thus it is certain there is no cognition When there is nothing present to be known.
And if that very one knows visual form, At that time, why does it not also hear? If that’s because there is no sound nearby, Then there is no cognition of it either.
How can a nature apprehending sound Become the apprehension of a form? One may be thought of as both parent and child, But that is not an actuality.
For in this way, the sattva, rajas, and tamas Are not a child and not a parent either. So it is not perceived to be a nature Possessing apprehension of a sound.
If like an actor, that itself is seen In different ways, then it’s not permanent. And if the different manners are just that, Then such a oneness is unprecedented.
But if the different manners are not true, Do tell me, please, what its own nature is. “Just consciousness,” you say, then in that case, It follows that all people would be one.
The sentient and nonsentient would be one As well, since their existence is the same. When the particulars are also false, What basis is there for similarity?
Nor can what is nonsentient be the self, Because it has no mind, like jugs and such. But if it knows from being conjoined with mind, It follows the nonsentient perishes.
If there is no change in the self, What does cognition do for it? In this way, you have made unknowing And inert space into the self.
“With no self, the relationship Of act and result would make no sense. One perishes when the act is done, So whose act would it be?” you ask.
It’s proven to us both the bases Of act and result are separate And that the self does not act on them. Is this not pointless to debate?
It cannot possibly be seen That one with the cause would have the result. The actor and the reaper are taught Based on a single continuum.
The past and future minds are not A me, since they do not exist. If the arisen mind is me, When it is gone, the me is no longer.
Just as when one dissects the trunk Of a banana tree, there’s nothing, When scrutinized analytically, The me as well is nothing true.
“If sentient beings do not exist, For whom should one arouse compassion?” For those projected by delusion, Whom we accept for the sake of results.
“Whose is the fruit if there are no beings?” That’s true; the wish is from delusion. For the sake of quelling suffering, Don’t block delusion about the result.
Delusions of a self increase The cause of suffering—the ego. “But there’s no stopping that,” you say. To cultivate selflessness is supreme.
The body’s not the feet or calves, Nor are the thighs or hips the body. It’s not the belly or the back; Neither is it the chest or arms.
It’s not the ribs, hands, armpits, shoulders, And it is not the organs either. The head and throat are not the body, So what, then, is the body here?
Now if the body were to dwell Partially in all of them, Its parts would thus dwell in those parts, But where would it reside itself?
If the entirety of the body Should dwell within the hands and such, Then there would be as many bodies As there are hands, et cetera.
If there’s no body, outside or in, How’s there a body in hands and such? If it’s not separate from the hands And such, then how does it exist?
Thus there’s no body. From delusion, We think of hands and such as the body, Just like perceiving a scarecrow as A human from its specific shape.
While the conditions are assembled, The body will appear as human. Likewise as long as there are hands And such, they’ll seem to be a body.
In the same way, what are the hands, Which are assemblages of fingers? Those are assemblages of knuckles. Dissecting knuckles into their parts,
The parts, too, divide into atoms. Dividing atoms into sides, Those, too, can split and have, like space, No parts, so there are no atoms either.
In this way, what discerning person Would lust for such a dreamlike form? When in this way there is no body, What is a man? What is a woman?
If pain exists in suchness, then Why does it not distress the cheerful? Why don’t those wracked with grief enjoy The tasty, if it’s pleasurable?
If it is not experienced Because the stronger overwhelms it, Then how can something that in nature Is not experience be a feeling?
“The pain is there in a subtle form.” Has its gross form not been dispelled? If it’s a different, mere pleasure, The subtle form would be of that.
If causes of its contrary Arise, so pain does not occur, Does that not prove that to conceive Of it as feeling is just fixation?
So therefore, as its antidote, Cultivate this investigation. The dhyana that grows in the field Of analysis is food for yogis.
If there’s a gap between the object And faculty, where is the contact? If there’s no gap, they would be one, And what would be in contact with what?
An atom can’t penetrate an atom; There is no space and they are equal. They won’t merge without penetration, And without merging, there’s no contact.
How is it logical to say That there is contact with the partless? If you should happen to observe The partless come in contact, show me.
It’s most illogical to contact An immaterial consciousness, Or, as examined earlier, Assemblies, as they are not things.
If contact thus does not exist, Then out of what does feeling arise? For sake of what are these travails? What causes injury to whom?
If there’s not anyone who feels And there’s not any feeling either, Once we have seen this situation, Why is it craving would not cease?
When seeing or touching, it’s by a nature That’s dreamlike and illusory. As they arise together with mind, Feelings are not perceived by it.
The earlier would be remembered But not experienced by a later. They’re not experienced by themselves, Nor are they felt by something else.
There is no one at all who feels, And feelings therefore are not real. Thus in this egoless assemblage, How then can they cause any harm?
Mind does not dwell in faculties, In form and such, or in between. Mind is not inside and not outside, And there is nowhere else it’s found.
What’s not a body and not other, Not mingled and not separate, Is nothing at all, and for this reason, The nature of beings is nirvana.
If mind precedes that which is known, What does it focus on to arise? If mind and the known are synchronous, What does it focus on to arise?
If it is after what is known, What does the mind arise from then? In such a way, one cannot realize The arising of any phenomenon.
“If there is thus no relative, Then how is it there are two truths? If it’s from another relative, Then how could beings reach nirvana?”
But that is someone else’s thought; It is not their own relative. It would exist if recognized later; If not, there is no relative.
The thought and what is thought of both Are each dependent on the other. All the analyses are stated According to the common consensus.
“If the analysis must be Analyzed analytically, So too must that analysis Be analyzed, ad infinitum.”
When the object has been analyzed, There is no basis to analyze. Without a base, it won’t arise, And this is what is called nirvana.
For those to whom these two seem true, This is extremely difficult. If entities are proven by knowing, What basis does knowing have to exist?
But if what’s known proves there is knowing, What basis has what’s known for being? If each exists by force of the other, Then neither of them could exist.
One’s not a parent without a child, So how then can the child arise? Without a child, there is no parent. Likewise these two are nonexistent.
“A shoot arises from a seed, And due to this, the seed is known. Why don’t we know the object exists Through the cognition it produces?”
A mind that’s other than the shoot Realizes that there was a seed. How is it known that there exists A knower by which the known is realized?
First, the people of the world Can see perceptually all causes. Distinctions of lotus stalks and such Are born of distinctions in the causes.
“What makes distinctions in the causes?” Distinctions in preceding causes. “Why can a cause produce a result?” It’s from the previous cause’s power.
If God is the cause of sentient beings, Then tell us first, please, what is God? “The elements,” you say. So be it— Why bother over a mere name?
But earth and such are multiple, Impermanent, inanimate, And not divine. They’re stepped upon And filthy, so they are not God.
Space is not God, since it’s inert. The self is not; it’s been refuted. An inconceivable creator Is beyond thought; why speak of it?
What do you posit He creates? A self? Aren’t that and earth and such And God by nature permanent? Cognition arises from its object
Without beginning; pleasure and pain, From actions. Do say what He creates. And if the cause has no beginning, How’s there a beginning to results?
Why is He not creating always? He’s not dependent on something else. There’s nothing else He did not make, So what could He depend upon?
If He’s dependent, the assembly Would be the cause, and God would not. When they’re assembled, He would have No power to not create, and when They’re not, no power to create.
If God creates without the wish to do so, It follows He’s controlled by something else. And if He wants to, He depends on that. Even creating, how is He almighty?
Those who say atoms are permanent Have been refuted earlier. The permanent, primal substance is The cause of beings, hold the Samkhyas.
They say that when the qualities— The so-called sattva, rajas, and tamas— Are balanced, that’s the primal substance. Unbalanced, they are called the world.
For one to have three natures is Illogical, so it’s nonexistent. Likewise the qualities don’t exist, For each of them is triple too.
It is far-fetched for sound and such To exist without the qualities, And pleasure and such aren’t possible In cloth and other mindless things.
If the nature of their cause is things, Haven’t we analyzed things already? For you, the cause is pleasure and such, But blankets don’t arise from them.
Pleasure and so forth come from blankets; Without them, there’s no pleasure and such. And pleasure and so forth as well Are never observed as permanent.
If instances of pleasure exist, Why isn’t the feeling apprehended? You say just that has become subtle, But how can it be gross and subtle?
If they lose grossness and turn subtle, Then gross or subtle, they are transient. Why do you not assert all things Are similarly impermanent?
If grossness is not other than pleasure, Pleasure is clearly impermanent. If you say something nonexistent Cannot arise—it doesn’t exist—
A nonexistent instance arising Amounts to this, despite your wish. If the result dwells in the cause, Then eating food is eating feces,
And for the price of cotton cloth, You should buy cotton seeds and wear them. “Since they’re deluded, people don’t see it.” But those who know reality
Present this, and there are some people Who know it—why do they not see it? If worldly folk lack valid knowledge, Then seeing the manifest is not true.
“If valid cognition were invalid, Then would not what is known be false? Therefore, in suchness, meditating On emptiness is illogical.”
Sans contact with imagined things, Their nothingness is not apprehended. Therefore the unreality Of a false thing is clearly false.
Thus when a child dies in a dream, The thought that they do not exist Negates the thought they do exist, And yet, it also is a fiction.
Having investigated thus, Nothing without a cause exists, And nothing dwells in the conditions, Individually or combined.
It does not come from somewhere else, Nor does it stay, nor does it go. Though the deluded say it’s true, How does it differ from illusion?
What an illusion emanates And that which causes emanate: Scrutinize where it is they come from And also where it is they go.
That which is seen when something else Is present but not when it’s absent Is fabricated, like a reflection. How is there any truth to it?
How would a cause be necessary For a thing that exists already? However, if it doesn’t exist, How would a cause be necessary?
Even a thousand million causes Cannot transform the nonexistent. How in that phase is it a thing? And what else would become a thing?
If at the time of nonexistence, A thing can’t possibly exist, When can a thing come into being? And if a thing has not arisen, That nonexistence does not vanish.
Without removing nonexistence, There’s no chance for the thing to be. Nor can a thing become nonexistent— For it would therefore have two natures.
In this way, there is no cessation, Nor is there any existent thing. Thus at all times, all wanderers Have not been born and do not cease.
Wandering beings are like dreams, Like a banana tree when probed. Reaching nirvana and not reaching Are not, in suchness, any different.
With things, which in this way are empty, What’s there to get? What’s there to lose? And who is there to be respected Or denigrated, and by whom?
Whence do pleasure and suffering come? What’s to dislike and what’s to like? When you investigate, in suchness, Who’s there that craves? What’s there to crave?
When it’s examined, in this world Of living beings, who here dies? What will become? What once became? And what are family and friends?
All those like me must understand That everything is just like space. The causes, strife and merriment, Make those who want pleasure for themselves
Become enraged or else exultant. They grieve, they toil, and they dispute. They slash and stab each other, doing Misdeeds that make their lives arduous.
Returning, returning to higher realms, Consuming, consuming the many pleasures, They die and plunge to lower realms— Intense, long-lasting agonies.
So many abysses in existence! And there, such things as these aren’t suchness. There, too, they’re incompatible. In existence, there is no such suchness.
There, the incomparable and dreadful Oceans of suffering are endless. And there, one has so little strength; And there, life is so very short.
There, in maintaining life and health, In weariness from hunger and thirst, In sleep and in adversity, In the fruitless company of fools,
Life passes quickly, pointlessly. Discernment is so hard to find. And there, what method could there be To stop the habits of distraction?
There, too, the maras try to make One fall into great lower realms. And there, wrong paths are plentiful. It’s difficult to get past doubt.
It’s hard to find these leisures again; Most hard to find a buddha appearing. Hard to give up the flood of afflictions. Alas! The stream of suffering!
Although the suffering is extreme, They do not see their own misery. Alas! It is most fitting to grieve For those deluged by suffering!
Just as some bathe repeatedly But enter flames again and again, Although they suffer terribly, They have the conceit that they are happy.
Likewise they live with the pretense That they will never grow old or die. But first they’re slain, and then there comes The terrible fall to lower realms.
So when will I bring peace to those Ravaged by fires of suffering By showering down from clouds of merit A rain of comforts to sustain them?
And when will I, free of all focus, Respectfully accumulate merit And then teach emptiness to those Whose focus brings them ruin?
By the merit of my having written The Way of the Bodhisattva, May every wandering being enter The bodhisattvas’ ways.
May everyone in all directions Who’s anguished or diseased In body or mind gain, through my merit, An ocean of happiness.
As long as they are in samsara, May their happiness never wane. May beings continuously obtain The bodhisattvas’ joy.
May all the beings in the hells, As many as there are In every universe, delight In the joys of the Blissful Realm.
May all those stricken by cold find warmth; Those stricken by heat be cooled By boundless oceans of waters born From great clouds of bodhisattvas.
May sword-leaf forests become for them Thick groves of sandalwood. May the trunks of shalmali trees grow Into wish-fulfilling trees.
May the regions of the hells become delightful With lakes of aromatic lotuses Made beautiful by gray geese, ducks, ruddy geese, White swans, and so forth, calling pleasantly.
May the heaps of embers become mounds of jewels; The burning ground become a crystal floor. May the crushing mountains also become temples Of worship that are filled with sugatas.
From today onward, may the rains of lava, Embers, and armaments be a rain of flowers. May those who strike each other with their weapons From now on playfully toss flowers instead.
May those sunk in the Unfordable River—whose water is like fire— Their flesh all fallen off, their bones as white as jasmine flowers, By the power of my virtue achieve the body of a god And dwell in goddesses’ company by the Mandakini.
“What frightens so the terrible henchmen of the Lord of Death, the crows, and vultures? Whose might,” they wonder, “this fine power dispelling the gloom all round and bringing us joy?” Looking up, may they see Vajrapani blazing in the center of the sky. Freed of misdeeds by the power of utter joy, may they consort with him.
Seeing a rain of blossoms mixed with scented water Drench and extinguish the infernal conflagrations, May the beings in hell be sated with a sudden pleasure, And wondering why that is, behold there Padmapani.
“Friends, cast away your fear and hurry here! Who could this be, now come to us Relieving all our suffering, exuding the energy of joy, Protecting beings from all, the bodhisattva who has roused compassion, The youth with hair in a topknot who dispels our every fear?
“Behold! See how a hundred gods revere his lotus feet with their tiaras. His eyes are moist with compassion; a shower of many flowers falls upon his head. Look at this lovely palace where a thousand goddesses praise him in song!” May the denizens of hell let forth such a clamor when they behold Manjughosha.
Then through my virtue, may the beings in the hells, Seeing a cloud of bodhisattvas free of obscurations Led by Samantabhadra shower down on them A comforting, cool, fragrant rain, take true delight.
May animals’ fear of being eaten By one another vanish. Like humans in Unpleasant Sound, May hungry ghosts be happy.
May streams of milk flowing from the hands Of noble Lokeshvara Ever satiate, bathe, and refresh The preta hungry ghosts.
May everyone who’s blind now see, And may the deaf always hear. May the pregnant give birth without pain, Just like Queen Mayadevi.
May those who are naked obtain clothing; The hungry acquire food. May those who are thirsty procure water And delicious beverages.
May beggars gain prosperity; Those wracked with grief gain joy. May the despondent be relieved And have great stability.
May every being who is sick Be swiftly cured of illness. May none of wanderers’ maladies Ever occur again.
May those who are frightened have no fears; May all in bonds be freed. May the powerless be powerful And friendly with each other.
May all directions be propitious For every traveler. May they accomplish without effort The aims for which they travel.
May those embarked on boats and ships Accomplish their intentions, And may they safely reach the shore To rejoice with their families.
May those astray on desolate paths Meet travelers and journey Unafraid of bandits, tigers, and such, With ease and unfatigued.
May the young and old without protection In wretched, roadless wilds— Asleep, inebriated, or mad— Be guarded by the gods.
Freed of all lack of leisure, may they Have faith, compassion, and prajna. May they, with perfect food and conduct, Recall their past lives always.
May all have wealth as endless as The treasury of the sky, Enjoying it as they wish without Any quarreling or threats.
May beings with little vitality Be vigorous and robust. May those ascetics with bad physiques Have the most sublime bodies.
May all the women in the world Gain favorable positions. May those who are lowly gain high status And also vanquish pride.
May every being without exception, Through this merit of mine, Abandon all misdeeds and then Act virtuously always.
Never parted from bodhichitta, may they Engage in enlightened conduct. May they be accepted by the buddhas And give up the acts of maras.
May every sentient being have Immeasurably long life. May all live happily forever. May the word death be unheard.
May pleasure groves of wishing trees Filled with dharma proclaimed By buddhas and the buddhas’ offspring Abound in all directions.
Everywhere may the ground be free Of gravel, and so forth, As even as a palm, as smooth As vaidurya in nature.
May great assemblies of bodhisattvas Be seated all around, And may they beautify the earth With their magnificence.
May all corporeal beings hear The unceasing sound of dharma From every bird, tree, and light ray, And even from the sky.
May they perpetually encounter The buddhas and their children And with boundless clouds of offerings, Revere the teacher of beings.
May the gods make the rains fall in season. May crops be excellent. May monarchs act according to dharma, And may the people thrive.
May medicines be efficacious And mantras be accomplished. May dakinis and rakshasas And such be compassionate.
May no sentient being be miserable, None wicked, none diseased. May none be fearful or despised. Let no one be unhappy.
Thriving with reading and recitation, May temples be well established. May the sangha—always harmonious— Accomplish its purposes.
May bhikshus with the wish to train Find solitary places, Give up all distraction, and meditate With minds that are workable.
May the bhikshunis be supported And give up quarrels and harm. May everyone who has gone forth Have unbroken discipline.
May those who’ve broken vows repent, And always giving up wrong, Be born in the higher realms and keep Their vows inviolate.
May panditas be venerated And also receive alms. Their mind streams pure, may they be known In every direction.
Without enduring the lower realms’ pains Or undergoing hardship, With a body better than a god’s, May beings soon become buddhas.
May every being frequently make Offerings to all buddhas. May they be happy always with The buddhas’ infinite bliss.
The bodhisattvas’ wishes for The sake of beings fulfilled, May sentient beings easily gain What the protectors intend.
Likewise may the pratyekabuddhas And shravakas be happy.
Until through Manjughosha’s kindness, I achieve the level Joyous, Always may I recall my lives, Go forth, and be ordained.
Even with meager fare, may I Live with vitality. In all my lives, may I find places Of perfect solitude.
Whenever I have the wish to see him Or ask of him a question, May I see without impediment Manjushri, the protector.
Just as Manjushri acts to achieve The benefit of all beings To the ends of space in the ten directions, May my deeds be the same.
For as long as space endures, As long as there are beings, I will remain to eliminate The sufferings of beings.
Whatever the sufferings of wanderers, May they all ripen on me. May the sangha of bodhisattvas bring Beings to happiness.
Sole cure for beings’ suffering, Source of all happiness, May the teachings remain for a long time, Supported and respected.
I bow to Manjushri, through whose kindness A virtuous mind arose. I also bow to the spiritual friends Whose kindness made me thrive.